According to a recent theory, Archean -age gold -quartz vein systems were formed over two 
billion years ago from magnetic fluids that ori ginated from molten granite -like bodies deep 
beneath the surface of the Earth. This theory is contrary to the widely held view that the 
systems were deposited from metamorphic fluids, that is, from fluids that formed during the 
dehydration of wet sedimenta ry rocks.  
The recently developed theory has considerable practical importance. Most of the gold 
deposits discovered during the original gold rushes were exposed at the Earths surface and 
were found because they had shed trails of alluvial gold  that were easily traced by simple 
prospecting  methods. Although these same methods still lead to an occasional discovery, most 
deposits not yet discovered have gone undetected because they are buried and have no surface 
express ion. 
The challenge in exploration is therefore to unravel the subsurface geology of an area and 
pinpoint the position of buried minerals. Methods widely used today include analysis of aerial 
images that yield a broad geological overview; geophysical techni ques that provide data on the  GMAT  129 
 magnetic, electrical, and mineralogical properties of the rocks being investigated; and sensitive 
chemical tests that are able to detect the subtle chemical halos that often envelop 
mineralization. However, none of these high -technology methods are of any value if the sites to 
which they are applied have never mineralized, and to maximize the chances of discovery the 
explorer must therefore pay particular attention to selecting the ground formations most likely 
to be mineralize d. Such ground selection relies to varying degrees on conceptual models, which 
take into account theoretical studies of relevant factors.  
These models are constructed primarily from empirical observations of known mineral 
deposits and from theories of ore -forming processes. The explorer uses the models to identify 
those geological features that are critical to the formation of the mineralization being modeled, 
and then tries to select areas for exploration that exhibit as many of the critical features as 
possible.  
1. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) advocating a return to an older methodology  
(B) explaining the importance of a recent theory  
(C) enumerating differences between two widely used methods  
(D) describing events leading to a discovery  
(E) challenging the assumptions on which a theory is based  
2. According to the passage, the widely held view of Archean -age gold -quartz vein 
systems is that such systems  
(A) were formed from metamorphic fluids  
(B) originated in molten granite -like bodi es 
(C) were formed from alluvial deposits  
(D) generally have surface expression  
(E) are not discoverable through chemical tests  
3. The passage implies that which of the following steps would be the first 
performed by explorers who wish to maximize their  chances of discovering gold?  
(A) Surveying several sites known to have been formed more than two billion 
years ago  
(B) Limiting exploration to sites known to have been formed from metamorphic 
fluid  
(C) Using an appropriate conceptual model to select a sit e for further exploration  
(D) Using geophysical methods to analyze rocks over a broad area  
(E) Limiting exploration to sites where alluvial gold has previously been found  
4. Which of the following statements about discoveries of gold deposits is supported 
by information in the passage?  
(A) The number of gold discoveries made annually has inc reased between the 
time of the original gold rushes and the present.  
(B) New discoveries of gold deposits are likely to be the result of exploration 130 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 techniques designed to locate buried mineralization.  
(C) It is unlikely that newly discovered gold deposits  will ever yield as much as 
did those deposits discovered during the original gold rushes.  
(D) Modern explorers are divided on the question of the utility of simple 
prospecting methods as a source of new discoveries of gold deposits.  
(E) Models based on the theory that gold originated from magnetic fluids have 
already led to new discoveries of gold deposits.  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following is easiest to 
detect?  
(A) A gold -quartz vein system origin ating in magnetic fluids  
(B) A gold -quartz vein system originating in me tamorphic fluids  
(C) A gold deposit that is mixed with granite  
(D) A gold deposit that has shed alluvial gold  
(E) A gold deposit that exhibits chemical halos  
6. The theory mentioned  in line 1 relates to the conceptual models discussed in the 
passage in which of the following ways?  
(A) It may furnish a valid account of ore -forming processes, and, hence, can 
support conceptual models that have great practical significance.  
(B) It sugge sts that certain geological formations, long believed to be mineralized, 
are in fact mineralized, thus confirming current conceptual models.  
(C) It suggests that there may not be enough similarity across Archean -age 
gold-quartz vein systems to warrant the formulation of conceptual models.  
(D) It corrects existing theories about the chemical halos of gold deposits, and 
thus provides a basis for correcting current conceptual models.  
(E) It suggests that simple prospecting methods still have a higher succes s rate in 
the discovery of gold deposits than do more modern methods.  
7. According to the passage, methods of exploring for gold that are widely used 
today are based on which of the following facts?  
(A) Most of the Earths remaining gold deposits are still  molten.  
(B) Most of the Earths remaining gold deposits are exposed at the surface.  
(C) Most of the Earths remaining gold deposits are buried and have no surface 
expression.  
(D) Only one type of gold deposit warrants exploration, since the other types of  
gold deposits are found in regions difficult to reach.  
(E) Only one type of gold deposit warrants exploration, since the other types of 
gold deposits are unlikely to yield concentrated quantities of gold.  
8. It can be inferred from the passage that the  efficiency of model -based gold 
exploration depends on which of the following?  
I. The closeness of the match between the geological features identified by the  GMAT  131 
 model as critical and the actual geological features of a given area  
II. The degree to which the model chosen relies on empirical observation of 
known mineral deposits rather than on theories of ore -forming processes  
III. The degree to which the model chosen is based on an accurate description of 
the events leading to mineralization  
(A) I only  
(B) II only 
(C) I and  II only 
(D) I and III only 
(E) I, II and III