


Notable as important nineteenth -century novels by women, Mary Shelleys Frankenstein  
and Emily Bronte s Wuthering Heights treat women very differently. Shelley produced a 
masculine text in which the fates of subordinate female characters seem entirely dependent 
on the actions of male heroes or anti-heroes . Bronte produced a more real istic narrative, 
portraying a world where men battle for  the favors of apparently high -spirited, independent 
women. Nevertheless, these two novels are alike in several crucial ways. Many readers are 
convinced that the compelling myst eries of each plot conceal elaborate structures of allusion 
and fierce, though shadowy, moral ambitions that seem to indicate metaphysical intentions, 
though efforts by critics to articulate these intentions have generated much controversy. Both 
novelists use a storytelling method that emphasizes ironic disjunctions between different 
perspectives on the same events as well as ironic tensions that inhere in the relationship 
between surface drama and concealed authorial intention, a method I call an evidentia ry 
narrative technique.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) defend a controversial interpretation of two novels  
(B) explain the source of widely recognized responses to two novels  
(C) delineate broad differences between two novels  
(D) compare and contrast two novels  
(E) criticize and evaluate two novels  
18. According the passage, Frankenstein differs from Wuthering Heights in its  
(A) use of multiple narrators  
(B) method of disguising the authors real purposes  
(C) portrayal of men as determiners of the novels act ion 
(D) creation of a realistic story  
(E) controversial effect on readers  
19. Which of the following narrative strategies best exemplifies the evidentiary 314 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 narrative technique mentioned in line 24?  
(A) Telling a story in such a way that the authors re al intentions are discernible 
only through interpretations of allusions to a world outside that of the story  
(B) Telling a story in such a way that the reader is aware as events unfold of the 
authors underlying purposes and the ways these purposes conflic t with the 
drama of the plot  
(C) Telling a story in a way that both directs attention to the incongruities among 
the points of view of several characters and hints that the plot has a 
significance other than that suggested by its mere events  
(D) Telling a story as a mystery in which the reader must deduce, from the 
conflicting evidence presented by several narrators, the moral and 
philosophical significance of character and event  
(E) Telling a story from the authors point of view in a way that implies b oth the 
authors and the readers ironic distance from the dramatic unfolding of 
events  
20. According to the passage, the plots of Wuthering Heights and Frankenstein are 
notable for their elements of  
(A) drama and secrecy  
(B) heroism and tension  
(C) realis m and ambition  
(D) mystery and irony  
(E) morality and metaphysics  