Shaws defense of a theater of ideas brought him up against  both his great 
bugbears commercialized art on the one hand and Art for Art s Sake on the other. His teaching 
is that beauty is a by -product of other activity; that the artist writes out of moral passion (in 
forms varying from political conviction to religious z eal), not out of love of art; that the pursuit 
of art for its own sake is a form of self -indulgence as bad as any other sort of sensuality . In the 
end, the errors of pure art and of commercialized art are identical: they both appeal primarily 224 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 to the sens es. True art, on the other hand, is not merely a matter of pleasure. It may be 
unpleasant. A favorite Shavian metaphor for the function of the arts is that of tooth -pulling. 
Even if the patient is under laughing gas, the tooth is still pulled.  
The history of aesthetics affords more examples of a didactic than of a hedonist view. But 
Shaw s didacticism takes an unusual turn in its application to the history of arts. If, as Shaw 
holds, ideas are a most important part of a work of art, and if, as he also holds , ideas go out of 
date, it follows that even the best works of art go out of date in some important respects  and 
that the generally held view that great works are in all respects eternal is not shared by Shaw. 
In the preface to Three P lays for Puritans , he maintains that renewal in the arts means renewal 
in philosophy, that the first great artist who comes along after a renewal gives to the new 
philosophy full and final form, that subsequent artists, though even more gifted, can do noth ing 
but refine upon the master without matching him. Shaw, whose essential modesty  is as 
disarming as his pose of vanity is disconcerting, assigns to himself the role, not of the master, 
but of the pioneer, the role of a Marlowe rather than of a Shakespear e. The whirligig of time 
will soon bring my audiences to my own point of view,  he writes, and then the next 
Shakespeare  that comes along will turn these petty tentative s of mine into masterpieces final 
for their epoch.  
Final for their epoch even Shakespearean masterpieces are not final beyond that. No 
one, says Shaw, will ever write a better tragedy than Lear or a better opera than Don Giovanni  
or a better music drama than Der Ring des Nibelungen;  but just as essential to a play as this 
aesthetic meri t is moral relevance which, if we take a naturalistic and historical view of morals, 
it loses, or partly loses, in time. Shaw, who has the courage of his historicism, consistently 
withstands the view that moral problems  do not change, and argues therefore that for us 
modern literature and music form a Bible surpassing in significance the Hebrew Bible. That is 
Shaw s anticipatory challenge to the neo -orthodoxy of today.  
1. The primary purpose  of the passage is to discuss  
(A) the unorthodoxy of Shaw s views o n the Bible  
(B) the aesthetic merit of Shaw s plays  
(C) Shaw s theory of art  
(D) Shavian examples of the theater of ideas  
(E) Shaw s naturalistic and historical view of morals  
2. The author sets off the word pure (line 9) with quotation marks in order  to 
(A) contrast it with the word true, which appears later (line 10)  
(B) suggest that, in this context, it is synonymous with commercialized  (line 9)  
(C) underscore its importance  
(D) strip away its negative connotations  
(E) emphasize its positive connotations  
3. According to the author, Shaw compares art to tooth -pulling (lines 12 -14) in 
order to show that  
(A) the moral relevance of a work of art must be extracted from the epoch in  GMAT  225 
 which it was created  
(B) true art is painful to the senses  
(C) even  the best works of art go out of date  
(D) pleasure is not the sole purpose of art  
(E) all art has a lasting effect on its audience  
4. According to the author, Shaw s didacticism was unusual  in that it was 
characterized by  
(A) idealism  
(B) historicism  
(C) hedonism  
(D) moralism  
(E) religious zeal  
5. It can be inferred from the pass age that Shaw would probably  agree with all of 
the following statements about Shakespeare EXCEPT:  
(A) He wrote out of a moral passion.  
(B) All of his plays are out of date in some important respect.  
(C) He was the most profound and original thinker of his epoch.  
(D) He was a greater artist than Marlowe.  
(E) His Lear  gives full and final form to the philosophy of his age.  
6. Which of the following  does the author cite as a contradiction in Shaw?  
(A) Whereas he pretended to be vain, he was actually modest.  
(B) He questioned the significance of the Hebre w Bible, and yet he believed that 
a great artist could be motivated by religious zeal.  
(C) Although he insisted that true art springs from moral passion, he rejected the 
notion that morals do not change.  
(D) He considered himself to be the pioneer of a new  philosophy , but he hoped 
his audiences would eventually adopt his point of view.  
(E) On the one hand, he held that ideas are a most important part of a work of art; 
on the other hand, he believed that ideas go out of date.  
7. The ideas attributed to Shaw in the passage suggest that he would most likely 
agree with which of the follo wing statements ? 
(A) Every great poet digs down to a level where human nature is always and 
everywhere alike.  
(B) A play cannot  be comprehended fully without some knowledge and 
imaginative understanding of its context.  
(C) A great music drama like Der Ring  des Nibelungen  springs from a love of 
beauty, not from a love of art.  
(D) Morality is immutable; it is not something to be discussed and worked out.  226 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) Don Giovanni  is a masterpiece because it is as relevant today as it was when 
it was created.  
8. The passage contains information that answers which of the following  questions?  
I. According to Shaw, what is the most important part of a work of art?  
II. In Shaw s view, what does the Hebrew  Bible have in common with Don 
Giovanni?  
III. According to the author, what was Shaw s assessment of himself as a 
playwright?  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
9. As it is revealed in the passage, the author s attitude toward Shaw can best be 
described as  
(A) condescending  
(B) completely neutral  
(C) approving  
(D) envious  
(E) adulatory