Although m uch has been written about the theological conflicts with Darwinian theory, little 
is known of the powerful scientific objections that modified Darwin s beliefs.  
During Darwin s lifetime, the accepted theory of heredity was not Mendel s theory of 
particula te inheritance , which, though published, was unrecognized, but the theory of blending 
inheritance , which holds that forms intermediate between those of the parents result from 
mating. Jenkin pointed out that if a rare and favorable mutation occurred, it would soon be 
blended out by repeated crossings from the wild -type form. Disputing Darwin s conception of 
evolution as proceeding through the natural selection of those with slightly better 
characteristics that arose randomly, Jenkin concluded that nat ural selection  could not account 
for the tremendous diversity of life, hypothesizing that large numbers of organisms mutated  
simultaneously  in the same direction a controlled orthogenetic process  resembling a series of 
special creations.  
Since special creationism  was an ideological target of his, Darwin found himself in a 
quandary. Although he did not abandon his theory, he admitted that natural selection played  a 
much smaller part in evo lution than he had previously claimed. He also embraced the 236 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Lamarckian concept that acquired traits in parents are transmitted to their offspring, thus 
providing a mechanism by which an entire population  could change in the same direction at 
once.  
Another potent objection came from the physicists led by Lord Kelvin, who contested the 
assumption of previous geologists and biologists that life had existed for billions of years, if not 
infinitely. How, they asked, could evolution proceed by slow steps in milli ons of years, and how 
could advanced  forms recently evolved show such great differences ? The Kelvinists, basing 
their conclusion on the assumption that the sun was an incandescent liquid mass rapidly 
radiating heat, calculated that the age of the earth was  between 20 and 40 million years.  
Admitting  that their calculations were correct and their premises rational, Darwin was 
forced to adjust this theory. He proposed that change had occurred much more rapidly in the 
past than in the present, where species see med static, and that more advanced forms varied 
more rapidly than lower forms. This provided further reason to advocate Lamarck s theory of 
inheritance, because that could account for the rapid change.  
Interestingly, both these retreats of Darwin were late r shown to be faulty. The discovery 
that the sun runs on a nearly infinite amount of atomic fuel totally invalidated Kelvin s argument, 
Mendel was rediscovered  in the twentieth century, when it was pointed out that the 
particulate nature of inheritance m eant that favorable mutation not only could persist, but could 
rapidly become prevalent.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) outline the process by which Darwin formulated and modified his theory of 
natural selection  
(B) propose a new interpret ation of Darwins  theory of evolution  
(C) explain  how other scientists of the time helped Darwin modify and perfect his 
theories  
(D) defend Darwinian theory against the objections raised by Darwin s 
contemporaries in the scientific community  
(E) discuss some of the scientific controversy that Darwin sparked and describe 
his response to it  
2. It can be inferred  from the passage that the theory of blending inheritance would 
predict that the offspring of  
(A) two strains of snapdragons, one wi th abnormal, radically  symmetrical flowers 
and the other with normal, bilaterally symmetrical flowers , would always 
have normal, bilaterally symmetrical flowers  
(B) a white horse and a black horse would always be gray  
(C) a man with type A blood and a woma n with type B blood would always have 
type A, type B, or type AB blood  
(D) a fly with large eyes and a fly with small eyes would always have one large 
eye and one small eye  
(E) two pink -flowered plants would always be red or white   GMAT  237 
 3. It can be inferred  from the passage that wild-type (line 12) means  
(A) nonmutant  
(B) rare  
(C) abnormal  
(D) random  
(E) favorable  
4. Which of the following, if it could be demonstrated, wo uld tend to support the 
Lamarckian concept that Darwin embraced?  
(A) Human beings evolved from now -extinct animals much like chimpanzees as a 
result of an erratic  accumulation  of changes in the gene pool through 
thousands of generations.  
(B) Some parental traits disappear in offspring and reappear in the following 
generation.  
(C) All species of organisms were immutably  created in their present forms . 
(D) Rats who have had their trails cut off produce tailless offspring.  
(E) Those hereditary traits that make their owners more likely to grow up and 
reproduce become increasingly common in a population from one generation 
to the next.  
5. The author s attitude toward Jenkin and Kelvin can best be described as  
(A) respectfu l 
(B) contemptuous  
(C) ambivalent  
(D) denunciatory  
(E) adulatory  
6. According to the passage, Darwin modified his beliefs in order to  
(A) bring them into line with the theory of particulate inheritance  
(B) disprove Lord Kelvin s view on the age of the e arth 
(C) meet the objections of Jenkin and Lamarck  
(D) resolve theological conflicts about evolution  
(E) dissociate himself from those who believed in special creationism  (line 21)  
7. The author sets off the word rediscovered  (line 51) in quotation marks in order 
to 
(A) emphasize that major scientific theories are rarely acknowledged or accepted 
when they are first promulgated  
(B) indicate that the term is somewhat ironic, since Mendel s work was virtually 
ignored when it was published  
(C) rebuke the  scientific community for deliberately suppressing Mendel s work 
until long after his death  238 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) underscore the similarity between Mendel s theory of particulate inheritance 
and the theory of blending inheritance that was accepted  during his lifetime  
(E) suggest that a scientist of Darwin s stature should have read Mendel s work 
when it was first published and immediately recognized its importance  
8. It can be inferred from the passage that if Mendel s work had been recognized 
and accepted during D arwin s lifetime, it would have had which of the following 
effect?  
I. It would have refuted Jenkin s objections to Darwin s theories . 
II. It would have supported Darwin s theory that evolution proceeds by very 
slow steps over millions of years.  
III. It wou ld have clarified and supported Darwin s theory of natural selection.  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
9. All of the following can be reasonably inferred from the passage EXCEPT:  
(A) The idea that evolution occurs by means of natural selection was not widely 
accepted until the twentieth century.  
(B) Darwin s theories were originally p redicated on the assumption that the earth 
is more than 40 million years old.  
(C) Many of Darwin s ideas about heredity were later shown to be incorrect.  
(D) Other scientists of Darwin s time, including both Jenkin and Lamarck, 
believed in evolution.  
(E) Darwin was the only scientist of his day who believed in natural selection.