Neotropical  coastal mangrove forests are usually zonal, with certain mangrove species 
found predominantly in the seaward portion of the habitat and other mangrove species on the 
more landward porti ons of the coast. The earliest research on mangrove forests produced 
descriptions of species distribution from shore to land, without exploring the causes of the 
distributions.  
The idea that zonation is caused by plant succession  was first expressed by J. H. Davis in a 
study of Florida mangrove forests. According to Davis scheme, the shoreline is being extended 
in a seaward direction because of the land -building role of mangroves, which, by trapping 
sediments over ti me, extend the shore. As a habitat gradually becomes more inland as the 
shore extends, the land -building species are replaced. This continuous process of accretion 
and succession would be interrupted only by hurricanes or storm flushings.  
Recently the un iversal application of Davis succession paradigm has been challenged. It 
appears that in areas where weak currents and weak tidal energies allow the accumulation of 
sediments, mangroves will follow land formation and accelerate the rate of soil accretion;  
succession will proceed according to Davis scheme. But on stable coastlines, the distribution of 
mangrove species results in other patterns of zonation; land building does not occur.  
To find a principle that explains the various distribution patterns, several researchers have 
looked to salinity and its effects on mangrove. While mangroves can develop in fresh water, 
they can also thrive in salinities as high as 2.5 times that of seawater. However, those mangrove 
species found in freshwater habitats do w ell only in the absence of competition, thus 
suggesting that salinity tolerance is a critical factor in competitive success among mangrove 
species. Research suggests that mangroves will normally dominate highly saline regions,  GMAT  279 
 although not because they req uire salt. Rather, they are metabolically efficient (and hence grow 
well) in portions of an environment whose high salinity excludes plants adapted to lower 
salinities. Tides create different degrees of salinity along a coastline. The characteristic 
mangro ve species of each zone should exhibit a higher metabolic efficiency at that salinity than 
will any potential invader, including other species of mangrove.  
253. The primary of the purpose of the passage is to  
(A) refute the idea that the zonation exhibited  in mangrove forests is caused by 
adaptation to salinity  
(B) describe the pattern of zonation typically found in Florida mangrove forests  
(C) argue that Davis succession paradigm cannot be successfully applied to 
Florida mangrove forests  
(D) discuss hypot heses that attempt to explain the zonation of coastal mangrove 
forests  
(E) establish that plants that do well in saline forest environments require salt to 
achieve maximum metabolic efficiency  
254. According to the passage, the earliest research on mang rove forest produced 
which of the following?  
(A) Data that implied random patterns of mangrove species distribution  
(B) Descriptions of species distributions suggesting zonation  
(C) Descriptions of the development of mangrove forests over time  
(D) Reclassi fication of species formerly thought to be identical  
(E) Data that confirmed the land -building role of mangroves  
255. It can be inferred from the passage that Davis paradigm does NOT apply to 
which of the following?  
(A) The shoreline of Florida mangrove forests first studies by Davis  
(B) A shoreline i n an area with weak currents  
(C) A shoreline in an area with weak tidal energy  
(D) A shoreline extended by land -building species of mangrove  
(E) A shoreline in which few sediments can accumulate  
256. Information in the passage indicates that the autho r would most probably regard 
which of following statements as INCORRECT?  
(A) Coastal mangrove forests are usually zonal.  
(B) Hurricanes interrupt the process of accretion and succession that extends 
existing shorelines.  
(C) Species of plants that thrive in  a saline habitat require salt to flourish.  
(D) Plants with the highest metabolic efficiency in a given habitat tend to exclude 
other plants from that habitat.  
(E) Shoreline in areas with weak currents and tides are more likely to be extended 280 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 through the process of accumulation of sediment than are shorelines with 
strong currents and tides.