(This passage was adapted from an article written in 1992.)  
Some observers have attributed the dramatic growth in temporary employment that 
occurred in the United States during the 1980s to increased participation in the workforce by 
certain groups, such as first -time or reentering workers, who supposedly prefer such 
arrangements. However, statistical analyses reveal that demographic changes in the workforce 
did not correlate with variations in the total number of temporary workers. Instead, these 
analyses suggest that factors affecting employers account for the rise in temporary 
employment. One factor is product demand: temporary employment is f avored by employers 
who are adapting to fluctuating demand for products while at the same time seeking to reduce 
overall labor costs. Another factor is labors reduced bargaining strength, which allows 
employers more control over the terms of employment. G iven the analyses, which reveal that 
growth in temporary employment now far exceeds the level explainable by recent workforce 
entry rates of groups said to prefer temporary jobs, firms should be discouraged from creating 
excessive numbers of temporary posi tions. Government policymakers should consider 
mandating benefit coverage for temporary employees, promoting pay equity between 
temporary and permanent workers, assisting labor unions in organizing temporary workers, 
and encouraging firms to assign tempora ry jobs primarily to employees who explicitly indicate 
that preference.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) present the results of statistical analyses and propose further studies.  
(B) explain a recent development and predict its eventual conse quences.  
(C) identify the reasons for a trend and recommend measures to address it.  
(D) outline several theories about a phenomenon and advocate one of them . 
(E) describe the potential consequences of implementing a new policy and argue 
in favor of that  policy.  
2. According to the passage, which of the following is true of the factors affecting 
employers that are mentioned in lines 9 -10? 
(A) Most experts cite them as having initiated the growth in temporary 
employment that occurred during the 1980s.  
(B) They may account for the increase in the total number of temporary workers 
during the 1980s.  
(C) They were less important than demographic change in accounting for the 
increase of temporary employment during the 1980s.  
(D) They included a sharp increa se in the cost of labor during the 1980s.   GMAT  141 
 (E) They are more difficult to account for than at other factors involved in the 
growth of temporary employment during the 1980s.  
3. The passage suggests which of the following about the use of temporary 
emplo yment by firms during the 1980s?  
(A) It enabled firms to deal with fluctuating product demand far more efficiently 
than they before the 1980s.  
(B) It increased as a result of increased participation in the workforce by certain 
demography groups.  
(C) It w as discouraged by government -mandated policies.  
(D) It was a response to preferences indicated by certain employees for more 
flexible working arrangements.  
(E) It increased partly as a result of workers reduced ability to control the terms 
of their employment.  
4. The passage suggests which of the following about the workers who took 
temporary jobs during the 1980s?  
(A) Their jobs frequently led to perma nent positions within firms.  
(B) They constituted a less demographically diverse group than has been 
suggested.  
(C) They were occasionally involved in actions organized by labor unions.  
(D) Their pay declined during the decade in comparison with the pay of  
permanent employees.  
(E) They did not necessarily prefer temporary employment to permanent 
employment.  
5. The first sentence in the passage suggests that the observers mentioned in line 1 
would be most likely to predict which of the following?  
(A) That the number of new te mporary positions would decline as fewer workers 
who preferred temporary employment entered the workforce.  
(B) That the total number of temporary positions would increase as fewer workers 
were able to find permanent positions . 
(C) That employers would have  less control over the terms of workers 
employment as workers increased their bargaining strength.  
(D) That more workers would be hired for temporary positions as product 
demand increased.  
(E) That the number of workers taking temporary positions would increase as 
more workers in any given demographic group entered the workforce.  
6. In the context of the passage, the word excessive (line 21) most closely 
corresponds to which of the fol lowing phrases?  
(A) Far more than can be justified by worker preferences . 
(B) Far more than can be explained by fluctuations in product demand.  142 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) Far more than can be beneficial to the success of the firms themselves.  
(D) Far more than can be accounted f or by an expanding national economy.  
(E) Far more than can be attributed to increases in the total number of people in 
the workforce.  
7. The passage mentions each of the following as an appropriate kind of 
governmental action EXCEPT  
(A) getting firms to offer temporary employment pr imarily to a certain group of 
people  
(B) encouraging equitable pay for temporary and permanent employees  
(C) facilitating the organization of temporary workers by labor unions  
(D) establishing guidelines on the proportion of temporary workers that firms 
should employ  
(E) ensuring that temporary workers obtain benefits from their employers