Since the early 1970s, historians have begun to devote serious attention to the working 
class in the United States. Yet while we now have studies of working -class communities and 
culture, we know remarkably little of worklessness. When historians have paid any attention at 
all to unemployment, they have focused on the Great Depression of the 1930s. The narrowness 
of this perspective ignores the pervasive recess ions and joblessness of the previous decades, as 
Alexander Keyssar shows in his recent book. Examining the period 1870 -1920, Keyssar  GMAT  81 
 concentrates on Massachusetts, where the historical materials are particularly rich, and the 
findings applicable to other i ndustrial areas.  
The unemployment rates that Keyssar calculates appear to be relatively modest, at least by 
Great Depression standards: during the worst years, in the 1870s and 1890s, unemployment 
was around 15 percent. Yet Keyssar rightly understands th at a better way to measure the 
impact of unemployment is to calculate unemployment frequencies measuring the percentage 
of workers who experience any unemployment in the course of  a year. Given this perspective, 
joblessness looms much larger.  
Keyssar also scrutinizes unemployment patterns according to skill level, ethnicity, race, age, 
class, and gender. He finds that rates of joblessness differed primarily according to clas s: those 
in middle -class and white -collar occupations were far less likely to be unemployed. Yet the 
impact of unemployment on a specific class was not always the same. Even when dependent on 
the same trade, adjoining communities could have dramatically di fferent unemployment rates. 
Keyssar uses these differential rates to help explain a phenomenon that has puzzled 
historians the startlingly high rate of geographical mobility in the nineteenth -century United 
States. But mobility was not the dominant working -class strategy for coping with 
unemployment, nor was assistance from private charities or state agencies. Self -help and the 
help of kin got most workers through jobless spells.  
While Keyssar might have spent more time developing the implications of his fi ndings on 
joblessness for contemporary public policy, his study, in its thorough research and creative use 
of quantitative and qualitative evidence, is a model of historical analysis.  
1. The passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) recommending a new course  of investigation  
(B) summarizing and assessing a study  
(C) making distinctions among categories  
(D) criticizing the current state of a field  
(E) comparing and contrasting two methods for calculating data  
2. The passage suggests that before the early 19 70s, which of the following was 
true of the study by historians of the working class in the United States?  
(A) The study was infrequent or superficial, or both.  
(B) The study was repeatedly criticized for its allegedly narrow focus.  
(C) The study relied m ore on qualitative than quantitative evidence.  
(D) The study focused more on the working -class community than on 
working -class culture.  
(E) The study ignored working -class joblessness during the Great Depression.  
3. According to the passage, which of the following is true of Keyssars findings 
concerning unemployment in Massachusetts?  
(A) They tend to contradict earlier findings about such unemployment.  
(B) They are possible because Massachusetts has the most easily accessible 
historical records.  82 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) They are the first to mention the existence of high rates of geographical 
mobility in the nineteenth century.  
(D) They are relevant to a h istorical understanding of the nature of unemployment 
in other states.  
(E) They have caused historians to reconsider the role of the working class during 
the Great Depression.  
4. According to the passage, which of the following is true of the unemployment 
rates mentioned in line  15? 
(A) They hovered, on average, around 15  percent during the period 1870 -1920.  
(B) They give less than a full sense of the impact of unemployment on 
working -class people.  
(C) They overestimate the importance of middle class and white -collar 
unemployment.  
(D) They have been considered by many hist orians to underestimate the extent of 
working -class unemployment.  
(E) They are more open to question when calculated for years other than those of 
peak recession.  
5. Which of the following statements about the unemployment rate during the Great 
Depression can be inferred from the passage?  
(A) It was sometimes higher than 15 percent.  
(B) It has been analyzed seriously only since the early 1970s.  
(C) It can be calculated more easily than can unemployment frequency.  
(D) It was never as high as the rate during the 1870s.  
(E) It has been shown by Keyssar to be lower t han previously thought.  
6. According to the passage, Keyssar considers which of the following to be among 
the important predictors of the likelihood that a particular person would be 
unemployed in late nineteenth -century Massachusetts?  
I. The persons clas s 
II. Where the person lived or worked  
III. The persons age  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and  II only 
(D) I and  III only 
(E) I, II, and III 
7. The author views Keyssars study with  
(A) impatient disapproval  
(B) wary concern   GMAT  83 
 (C) polite skepticism  
(D) scrupulous neutrality  
(E) qualified admiration  
8. Which of the following, if true, would most strongly support Keyssars  findings 
as they are described by the author?  
(A) Boston, Massachusetts, and Quincy, Massachusetts, adjoining communities, 
had a higher rate of unemployment for working -class people in 1870 than in 
1890.  
(B) White -collar professionals such as attorneys ha d as much trouble as day 
laborers in maintaining a steady level of employment throughout the period 
1870 -1920.  
(C) Working -class women living in Cambridge, Massachusetts, were more likely 
than working -class men living in Cambridge to be unemployed for some  
period of time during the year 1873.  
(D) In the 1890s, shoe -factory workers moved away in large numbers from 
Chelmsford, Massachusetts, where shoe factories were being replaced by 
other industries, to adjoining West Chelmsford, where the shoe industry 
flourished.  
(E) In the late nineteenth century, workers of all classes in Massachusetts were 
more likely than workers of all classes in other states to move their place of 
residence from one location to another within the state.