When A. Philip Randolph assumed the leadership of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car  
Porters, he began a ten -year battle to win recognition from the Pullman  Company, the largest 
private employer of Black people in the United States and the company that controlled the 
railroad industry s sleeping car  and parlor  service. In 1935 the Brotherhood became the first 
Black union recognized by a major corporation. Randolphs efforts in the battle helped 
transform the attitude of Black workers toward unions and toward themselves as an identifiable 
group; eventually, Randolph helped to weaken organized labors antagonism toward Black 
workers.  
In the Pullman contest Randolph faced formidabl e obstacles. The first was Black workers 
understandable skepticism toward unions, which had historically barred Black workers from 
membership. An additional obstacle was the union that Pullman itself had formed, which 124 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 weakened support among Black workers for an independent entity.  
The Brotherhood possessed a number of advantages, however, including Randolphs own 
tactical abilities. In 1928 he took the bold step of threatening a strike against Pullman. Such a 
threat, on a national scale, under Black leader ship, helped replace the stereotype of the Black 
worker as servant with the image of the Black worker as wage earner . In addition, the porters 
very isolation aided the Brotherhood. Porters were scattered throughout the country, sleeping 
in dormitories in Black communities; their segregated life protected the unions internal 
communications from intercept ion. That the porters were a homogeneous group working for a 
single employer with single labor policy, thus sharing the same grievances from city to city, also 
strengthened the Brotherhood and encouraged racial identity and solidarity as well. But it was 
only in the early 1930s that federal legislation prohibiting a company from maintaining its own 
unions with company money eventually allowed the Brotherhood to become recognized as the 
porters representative.  
Not content with this triumph, Randolph brough t the Brotherhood into the American 
Federation of Labor, where it became the equal of the Federations 105 other unions. He 
reasoned that as a member union, the Brotherhood would be in a better position to exert 
pressure on member unions that practiced rac e restrictions. Such restrictions were eventually 
found unconstitutional in 1944.  
1. According to the passage, by 1935 the skepticism of Black workers toward 
unions was  
(A) unchanged except among Black employees of railroad -related industries  
(B) reinforce d by the actions of the Pullman Companys union  
(C) mitigated by the efforts of Randolph  
(D) weakened by the opening up of many unions to Black workers  
(E) largely alleviated because of the policies of the American Federation of Labor  
2. In using the wo rd understandable (line 14), the author most clearly conveys  
(A) sympathy with attempts by the Brotherhood between 1925 and 1935 to 
establish an independent union  
(B) concern that the obstacles faced by Randolph between 1925 and 1935 were 
indeed formidab le 
(C) ambivalence about the significance of unions to most Black workers in the 
1920s  
(D) appreciation of the attitude of many Black workers in the 1920s toward 
unions  
(E) regret at the historical attitude of unions toward Black workers  
3. The passage suggests which of the following about the response of porters to the 
Pullman Companys own union?  
(A) Few porters ever joined this union.  
(B) Some porters supported thi s union before 1935.  
(C) Porters, more than other Pullman employees, enthusiastically supported this  GMAT  125 
 union.  
(D) The porters response was most positive after 1935.  
(E) The porters response was unaffected by the general skepticism of Black 
workers conce rning unions.  
4. The passage suggests that if the grievances of porters in one part of the United 
States had been different from those of porters in another part of the country, 
which of the following would have been the case?  
(A) It would have been more d ifficult for the Pullman Company to have had a 
single labor policy.  
(B) It would have been more difficult for the Brotherhood to control its channels 
of communication.  
(C) It would have been more difficult for the Brotherhood to build its 
membership.  
(D) I t would have been easier for the Pullman Companys union to attract 
membership.  
(E) It would have been easier for the Brotherhood to threaten strikes.  
5. The passage suggests that in the 1920s a company in the United States was able 
to 
(A) use its own funds to set up a union  
(B) require its employees to join the companys own union  
(C) develop a single labor policy for all its employees with little employee dissent  
(D) pressure its employees to contribute money to maintain the companys own 
union  
(E) use its resources to prevent the passage of federal legislation that would have 
facilitated the formation of independent unions  
6. The passage supplies information concerning which of the following matters 
related to Randolph?  
(A) The steps he took to ini tiate the founding of the Brotherhood  
(B) His motivation for bringing the Brotherhood into the American Federation of 
Labor  
(C) The influence he had on the passage of legislation overturning race 
restrictions in 19 44 
(D) The influence he had on the passage  of legislation to bar companies from 
financing their own unions  
(E) The success he and the Brotherhood had in influencing the policies of the 
other unions in the American Federation of Labor