Since Would War II considerable advances have been made in the area of health -care 
services. These include better access to health care (particularly for the  poor and minorities), 
improvements in physical plants, and increased numbers of physicians and other health 
personnel. All have played a part in the recent improvement in life expectancy . But there is 
mounting criticism of the large remaining gaps in access, unbridled cost inflation, the further 
fragmentation of service, excessive indulgence in wasteful high -technology gadgeteering,  and 
a breakdown in doctor -patient relationships. In recent years  proposed panaceas and new 
programs, small and large, have proliferated at a feverish pace and disappointments multiply at 
almost the same rate. This has led to an increased pessimism everythin g has been tried and 
nothing works which sometimes borders on cynicism or even nihilism.  
It is true that the automatic pass through  of rapidly spiraling costs  to government and 
insurance carriers, which was set in a publicize d environment of the richest nation in the 
world,  produced for a time  a sense of unlimited resources and allowed to develop a mood 
whereby every practitioner and institution could do his own thing  without undue concern for 
the Medical Commons.  The practice of full -cost reimbursement encouraged capital investment 
and now the industry is overcapitalized. Many cities have hundreds of excess hospital beds; 
hospitals have proliferated a superabundance of high -technology equipment; and structural 
ostentation and luxury were the order of the day . In any given day, one -fourth of all community 
beds are vacant; expensive equipment is underused or, worse, used unnecessarily. Capital 
investment brings rapidly rising operating costs . 
Yet, in part, this pessim ism derives from expecting too much of health care. It must be 
realized that care is, for most people, a painful experience, often accompanied by fear and 
unwelcome results. Although there is vast room for improvement, health care will always retain  
some u npleasantness and frustration. Moreover, the capacities of medical science are limited. 
Humpty Dumpty  cannot always be put back together again. Too many  physicians are reluctant 
to admit their limitations to patients; too many patients and families are unwilling to accept 
such realities. Nor is it true that everything has been tried and nothin g works, as shown by the 
prepaid group practice plans of the Kaiser Foundation and at Puget Sound. In the main , 
however, such undertakings have been drowned by a veritable flood of public and private 
moneys which have supported and e ncouraged the continuation of conventional practices and 
subsidized their shortcomings on a massive, almost unrestricted scale. Except for the most 
idealistic and dedicated, there were no incentives to seek change or to practice self -restraint or 
frugality . In this atmosphere, it is not fair to condemn as failures all attempted experiments; it 
may be more accurate to say many never had a fair trial.  
1. The author implies that the Kaiser Foundation and Puget Sound plans (lines 
47-48) differed from other plan s by 
(A) encouraging capital investment  
(B) requiring physicians to treat the poor  
(C) providing incentives for cost control  
(D) employing only dedicated and idealistic doctors  180 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) relying primarily on public funding  
2. The author mentions all of the fo llowing as consequences of full -cost 
reimbursement EXCEPT  
(A) rising operating costs  
(B) underused hospital facilities  
(C) overcapitalization  
(D) overreliance on expensive equipment  
(E) lack of services for minorities  
3. The tone of the passage can best  be described as  
(A) light -hearted and amused  
(B) objective but concerned  
(C) detached and unconcerned  
(D) cautious but sincere  
(E) enthusiastic and enlightened  
4. According to the author, the pessimism  mentioned at line 35 is partly 
attributable to t he fact that  
(A) there has been little real improvement in health -care services  
(B) expectations about health -care services are sometimes unrealistic  
(C) large segments of the population find it impossible to get access to 
health -care services  
(D) advances  in technology have made health care service unaffordable  
(E) doctors are now less concerned with patient care  
5. The author cites the prepaid plans in lines 46 -48 as  
(A) counterexamples to the claim that nothing has worked  
(B) examples of health -care plans that were over -funded  
(C) evidence that health -care services are fragmented  
(D) proof of the theory that no plan has been successful  
(E) experiments that yielded disappointing results  
6. It can be inferred that the sentence Humpty Dumpty cannot always be put back 
together again  means that  
(A) the cost of health -care services will not decline  
(B) some people should not become doctors  
(C) medical care is not really essential to good health  
(D) illness is often unpleasant and even painful  
(E) medical science cannot cure every ill  
7. With which of the fo llowing descriptions of the system for the delivery of  GMAT  181 
 health -care services would the author most likely agree?  
(A) It is biased in favor of doctors and against patients.  
(B) It is highly fragmented and completely ineffective  
(C) It has not embraced new te chnology rapidly enough  
(D) It is generally effective but can be improved  
(E) It discourages people from seeking medical care  
8. Which of the following best describes the logical structure of the selection?  
(A) The third paragraph is intended as a refutation of the first and second 
paragraphs.  
(B) The second and third paragr aphs explain and put into perspective the points 
made in the first paragraph.  
(C) The second and third paragraphs explain and put into perspective the points 
made in the first paragraph.  
(D) The first paragraph describes a problem, and the second and third  paragraphs 
present two horns of a dilemma.  
(E) The first paragraph describes a problem, the second its causes, and the third a 
possible solution.  
9. The author s primary concern is to  
(A) criticize physicians and health -care administrators for investing in techno -
logically advanced equipment  
(B) examine some problems affecting delivery of health -care services and assess 
their severity  
(C) defend the medical community from charges that health -care has not 
improved since World War II  
(D) analyze the reasons for the health -care industry s inability  to provide quality 
care to all segments of the population  
(E) describe the peculiar economic features of the health -care industry that are the 
causes of spiraling medical costs