The promise of finding long -term technological  solutions to the problem of world food 
shortages seems  difficult to fulfill. Many innovations that were once heavily supported and 
publicized, such as fish -protein concentrate and protein from algae grown on petroleum  GMAT  193 
 substrates, have since fallen by the wayside. The proposals themselves were technically 
feasible, but they proved to be economically unviable and to yield food products culturally 
unacceptable to their consumers. Recent innovations such as opaque -2 maize, Antarctic krill, 
and the wheat -rye hybrid triticale  seem more promising, but it is too early to predict their 
ultimate fate.  
One characteristic common to unsuccessful food innovations has been that, even with 
extensive government support, they often have not been technologically ada pted or culturally 
acceptable to the people for whom they had been developed. A successful new technology, 
therefore, must fit the entire sociocultural system in which it is to find a place. Security of crop 
yield, practicality of storage, palatability, an d costs are much more significant than had 
previously been realized by the advocates of new technologies. For example, the better protein 
quality in tortillas  made from opaque -2 maize will be of only limited benefit to a family on the 
margin of subsistence if the new maize is not culturally acceptable or is more vulnerable to 
insects.  
The adoption of new food technologies depends on more than these techni cal and cultural 
considerations; economic factors and governmental policies also strongly influence the ultimate 
success of any innovation. Economists in the Anglo -American tradition have taken the lead in 
investigating the economics of technological innov ation. Although they exaggerate in claiming 
that profitability is the key factor guiding technical change they completely disregard the 
substantial effects of culture they are correct in stressing the importance of profits. Most 
technological innovations i n agriculture can be fully used only by large landowners and are only 
adopted if these profit -oriented business people believe that the innovation will increase their 
incomes. Thus, innovations that carry high rewards for big agribusiness groups will be ad opted 
even if they harm segments of the population and reduce the availability of food in a country.  
Further, should a new technology promise to alter substantially the profits and losses associated 
with any production system, those with economic power wil l strive to maintain and improve 
their own positions. Since large segments of the populations of many developing countries are 
close to the subsistence margin and essentially powerless, they tend to be the losers in this 
system unless they are aided by a g overnment policy that takes into account the needs of all 
sectors of the economy. Therefore, although technical advances in food production and 
processing will perhaps be needed to ensure food availability, meeting food needs will depend 
much more on equal izing economic power among the various segments of the populations 
within the developing countries themselves.  
1. Which of the following best describes the organization of the first paragraph?  
(A) A suggestion is made and arguments in its favor are provide d. 
(B) A criticism is levied and an alternative proposal is suggested.  
(C) A generalization is advanced and supporting evidence is provided.  
(D) An example is analyzed and general conclusions are derived from it.  
(E) A position is stated and evidence qualifying it is provided.  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that the author was unable to assess the truth 
of which of the following statements about opaque -2 maize?  
(A) It is a more recent innovation than th e use of fish -protein concentrate.  194 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) It can be stored as easily as other varieties of maize.  
(C) It is more popular than the wheat -rye hybrid triticale.  
(D) It produces tortillas of greater protein content than do other varieties of 
maize.  
(E) It is m ore susceptible to insects than are other varieties of maize.  
3. The passage mentions all of the following as factors important to the success of a 
new food crop EXCEPT the  
(A) practicality of storage of the crop  
(B) security of the crop yield  
(C) quality of the crop s protein  
(D) cultural acceptability of the crop  
(E) costs of production of the crop  
4. According to the passage, the use of Antarctic krill as a food is an innovation 
whose future is  
(A) basically gloomy but still uncertain  
(B) somewhat promising but very tentative  
(C) generally bright and virtually  assured  
(D) tied to the success of opaque -2 maize  
(E) endangered by certain technical problems  
5. The author suggests that, in most developing countries, extensive government 
intervention accompanying the introduction of a food innovation will  
(A) usua lly be sufficient to guarantee the financial success of the innovation  
(B) be necessary to ensure that the benefits of the innovation will be spread 
throughout the society  
(C) provide the incentive necessary to convince landowners to try the innovation  
(D) generally cost the country more than will be earned by the innovation  
(E) normally occur only when the innovation favors large landowners  
6. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to agree 
with which of the following statements concerning the solution to food shortages 
in developing coun tries?  
(A) The introduction of technological innovations to reap profits might alleviate 
food shortages to some degree, but any permanent solution can come only 
from effective governmental intervention in the socioeconomic system.  
(B) Innovations in agricu ltural technology will be of little help, and perhaps even 
harmful, in combating food shortages, no matter how well designed they are 
to suit local circumstances.  
(C) Long -lasting solutions will not be found until large landowners adopt 
improvements that w ill make production more efficient and thus more  GMAT  195 
 profitable.  
(D) In order to achieve a meaningful solution to the problem of food shortages, 
the tastes of the general population must be educated to accept the new food 
products of modern agricultural techno logy.  
(E) Although a short -term solution to food shortages can be achieved by 
importing food from other countries, a long -term solution requires a 
restructuring of the countries  socioeconomic system.  
7. The first paragraph of the passage best supports which  of the following 
statements?  
(A) Too much publicity can harm the chances for the success of a new food 
innovation.  
(B) Innovations that produce culturally acceptable crops will generally be 
successful.  
(C) A food -product innovation can be technically feas ible and still not be 
economically viable.  
(D) It is difficult to decide whether a food -product innovation has actually been a 
success.  
(E) Triticale will not be a success as a food source for most developing countries.  
8. The author provides a sustained argument to support which of the following 
assertions?  
(A) Profitability is neither necessary nor sufficient for a new technology to be 
adopted.  
(B) Profitability is the key factor guiding technological change.  
(C) Economic factors and governmental policies strongly influence the ultimate 
success of any innovation.  
(D) Opaque -2 maize is of limited benefit to poor families in developing countries.  
(E) Innovations carrying high rewards for big agribusiness groups harm the poor.  
9. The primary purpose of the passage is to discuss the  
(A) means of assessing the extent of the world food shortage  
(B) difficulties of applying technological solutions t o the problem of food 
shortages  
(C) costs of introducing a new food technology into a developing country  
(D) Anglo -American bias of those trying to alleviate world food problems  
(E) nature of the new technological innovations in the area of food product ion