152 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Coral reefs are one of the most fragile, biologically complex, and diverse marine 
ecosystems on Earth. This ecosystem is one of the fascinati ng paradoxes of the biosphere: how 
do clear, and thus nutrient -poor, waters support such prolific and productive communities? Part 
of the answer lies within the tissues of the corals themselves. Symbiotic cells of algae known as 
zooxanthellae carry out pho tosynthesis using the metabolic wastes of the coral thereby 
producing food for themselves, for their corals, hosts, and even for other members of the reef 
community. This symbiotic process allows organisms in the reef community to use sparse 
nutrient resou rces efficiently.  
Unfortunately for coral reefs, however, a variety of human activities are causing worldwide 
degradation of shallow marine habitats by adding nutrients to the water. Agriculture, 
slash-and-burn land clearing, sewage disposal and manufactur ing that creates waste 
by-products all increase nutrient loads in these waters. Typical symptoms of reef decline are 
destabilized herbivore populations and an increasing abundance of algae and filter -feeding 
animals. Declines in reef communities are consis tent with observations that nutrient input is 
increasing in direct proportion to growing human populations, thereby threatening reef 
communities sensitive to subtle changes in nutrient input to their waters.  
1. The passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) d escribing the effects of human activities on algae in coral reefs  
(B) explaining how human activities are posing a threat to coral reef communities  
(C) discussing the process by which coral reefs deteriorate in nutrient -poor waters  
(D) explaining how coral  reefs produce food for themselves  
(E) describing the abundance of algae and filter -feeding animals in coral reef 
areas  
2. The passage suggests which of the following about coral reef communities?  
(A) Coral reef communities may actually be more likely t o thrive in waters that 
are relatively low in nutrients.  
(B) The nutrients on which coral reef communities thrive are only found in 
shallow waters.  
(C) Human population growth has led to changing ocean temperatures, which 
threatens coral reef communities.  
(D) The growth of coral reef communities tends to destabilize underwater 
herbivore populations.  
(E) Coral reef communities are more complex and diverse than most ecosystems 
located on dry land.  
3. The author refers to filter -feeding animals (line 20) in order to  
(A) provide an example of a characteristic sign of reef deterioration  
(B) explain h ow reef communities acquire sustenance for survival  
(C) identify a factor that helps herbivore populations thrive  
(D) indicate a cause of decreasing nutrient input in waters that reefs inhabit  
(E) identify members of coral reef communities that rely on coral reefs for  GMAT  153 
 nutrients  
4. According to the passage, which of the following is a factor that is threatening the 
survival of coral reef communities?  
(A) The waters they inhabit contain few nutrient resources.  
(B) A decline in nutrient input is disrupting their symbiotic relationship with 
zooxanthellae . 
(C) The degraded waters of their marine habitats have reduced their ability to 
carry out photosynthesis . 
(D) They are too biologically complex to survive in habitats with minimal 
nutrient input.  
(E) Waste by -products result in an increase in nutrient input to reef communities.  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that the author describes coral reef 
communities as paradoxical most likely for which of the following reasons?  
(A) They are thriv ing even though human activities have depleted the nutrients in 
their environment.  
(B) They are able to survive in spite of an overabundance of algae inhabiting their 
waters.  
(C) They are able to survive in an environment with limited food resources.  
(D) T heir metabolic wastes contribute to the degradation of the waters that they 
inhabit.  
(E) They are declining even when the water surrounding them remains clear.