
The whole biosp here, like the individual organisms that live inside it, exists in a chemically 
dynamic state . In this homeostatic system, a great number of organic compounds are 
synthesize d, transformed , and decomposed continuously; together, these processes constitute 
the major parts of the carbon cycle. For the smooth operation of this cycle, degradation is just 
as important as synthesis: the green plants produce great quantities of polym ers, such as 
cellulose, and innumerable other compounds like alkaloids, terpenes, and flavonoids, that 
green plants cannot use as sources of energy during respiration. The release of the carbon in 
these compounds for recycling depends almost entirely on th e action of both aerobic and 
anaerobic bacteria and certain types of fungi. Some bacteria and fungi possess the unique and 
extremely important biochemical asset of being able to catalyze the oxidation of numerous inert 
products, thereby initiating reaction  sequences that produce carbon dioxide and so return much 
carbon to a form that actively enters into life cycles once again.  
25. The passage  contains information that would answer which of the following 
questions about the carbon cycle?  
I. What are some of  the compounds that are broken down in the carbon cycle?  
II. Why are some compounds that are involved in the carbon cycle less reactive 
than others?  
III. What role do bacteria and fungi play in the carbon cycle?  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) I an d II only  
(E) I and III only  
26. The author implies that w hich of the following is the primary reason that 
degradation is as important as synthesis to the smooth operation of the carbon 
cycle?  
(A) Most of the polymers and organic compounds found in the plant kin gdom are 
chemically unstable.  
(B) The synthesis of some organic material deprives life processes of an energy 
source.   GRE  299 
 (C) Decomposition permits the recycling of carbon that would otherwise be fixed 
in certain substances.  
(D) Many organisms cannot use plant s as a source of food, but can feed on 
bacteria and fungi.  
(E) Bacteria and fungi could not survive if some carbon compounds were not 
degraded.  
27. The author s contention about the importance of bacteria and fungi in the 
production of energy for life processes would be most clearly strengthened if 
which of th e following were found to be true?  
(A) Both aerobes and anaerobes provide sources of energy through the 
decomposition of organic material.  
(B) Most compounds containing carbon are unavailable as energy sources except 
to some bacteria and fungi.  
(C) Bacteri a and fungi break down inert material in ways that do not involve 
oxidation.  
(D) Many compounds remain inert, even in the presence of bacteria and fungi.  
(E) Bacteria and fungi assist in the synthesis of many organic  compounds.  
No. 2 -2 
SECTION A  