It can be argued that much consumer dissatisfaction with marketing strategies arises from 
an inability to aim advertising at only the likely buyers of a given product.  
There are three groups of c onsumers who are affected by the marketing process. First, 
there is the market segment people who need the commodity in question. Second, there is 
the program target people in the market segment with the best fit characteristics for a 
specific product. L ots of people may need trousers, but only a few qualify as likely buyers of 
very expensive designer trousers. Finally, there is the program audience all people who are 
actually exposed to the marketing program without regard to whether they need or want th e 
product.  
These three groups are rarely identical. An exception occurs occasionally in cases where 
customers for a particular industrial product ma y be few and easily identifiable. Such customers, 
all sharing a particular need, are likely to form a meaningful target, for example, all companies 
with a particular application of the product in question, such as high -speed fillers of bottles at 
breweries . In such circumstances, direct selling (marketing that reaches only the program 
target) is likely to be economically justified, and highly specialized trade media exist to expose 
members of the program target and only members of the program target to the marketing 
program.  
Most consumer -goods markets are significantly different. Typically, there are many rather 
than few potential customers. Each represents a relatively small percentage of potential sales. 
Rarely do members of a particular market segment gr oup themselves neatly into a meaningful 
program target. There are substantial differences among consumers with similar demographic 
characteristics. Even with all the past decades advances in information technology, direct 
selling of consumer goods is rare , and mass marketing a marketing approach that aims at a 
wide audience remains the only economically feasible mode. Unfortunately, there are few 94 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 media that allow the marketer  to direct a marketing program exclusively to the program target. 
Inevitably, people get exposed to a great deal of marketing for products in which they have no 
interest and so they become annoyed.  
1. The passage suggests which of the following a bout highly specialized trade 
media?  
(A) They should be used only when direct selling is not economically feasible.  
(B) They can be used to exclude from the program audience people who are not 
part of the program target.  
(C) They are used only for very exp ensive products.  
(D) They are rarely used in the implementation of marketing programs for 
industrial products.  
(E) They are used only when direct selling has not reached the appropriate market 
segment.  
2. According to the passage, most consumer -goods markets share which of the 
following characteristics?  
I. Customers who differ significantly from each other  
II. Large numbers of potential customers  
III. Customers who each represent a small percentage of potential sales  
(A) I only 
(B) II only 
(C) I and II only 
(D) II and III only 
(E) I, II, and III 
3. The passage suggests which of the following about direct sell ing? 
(A) It is used in the marketing of most industrial products.  
(B) It is often used in cases where there is a large program target.  
(C) It is not economically feasible for most marketing programs.  
(D) It is used only for products for which there are man y potential customers.  
(E) It is less successful at directing a marketing program to the target audience 
than are other marketing approaches.  
4. The author mentions trousers ( lines 9 and 11 ) most likely in order to  
(A) make a comparison between t he program target and the program audience  
(B) emphasize the similarities between the market segment and the program 
target  
(C) provide an example of the way three groups of consumers are affected by a 
marketing program  
(D) clarify the distinction between the market segment and the program target  
(E) introduce the concept of the program audience   GMAT  95 
 5. Which of the following best exemplifies the situation described in the last two 
sentences  of the passage?  
(A) A product suitable for women age 21 -30 is marketed at meetings  attended 
only by potential customers.  
(B) A company develops a new product and must develop an advertising 
campaign to create a market for it.  
(C) An idea for a specialized product remains unexplored because media 
exposure of the product to its few potent ial customers would be too 
expensive.  
(D) A new product is developed and marketers collect demographic data on 
potential consumers before developing a specific advertising campaign.  
(E) A product suitable for men age 60 and over is advertised in a magazine read 
by adults of all ages.  
6. The passage suggests that which of the following is true about the marketing of 
industrial products like those discussed in the third paragraph ? 
(A) The market segment and program target are identical.  
(B) Mass marketing is the only feasible way of advertising such products.  
(C) The marketing program cannot be directed specifically to the program target.  
(D) More customers  would be needed to justify the expense of direct selling.  
(E) The program audience would necessarily be made up of potential customers, 
regardless of the marketing approach that was used.  
7. The passage supports which of the following statements about demographic 
characteristics and marketing?  
(A) Demographic  research is of no use in determining how successful a product 
will be with a particular group of consumers.  
(B) A program audience is usually composed of people with similar demographic 
characteristics.  
(C) Psychological factors are more important than de mographic factors in 
defining a market segments.  
(D) Consumers with similar demographic characteristics do not necessarily form 
a meaningful program target.  
(E) Collecting demographic data is the first step that marketers take in designing 
a marketing program.  
8. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following is true for most 
consumer -goods markets?  
(A) The program audience is smaller than  the market segment.  
(B) The program audience and the market segment are usually identical.  
(C) The market segment and the program target are usually identical.  
(D) The program target is larger than the market segment.  96 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) The program target and the pro gram audience are not usually identical.