Caffeine, the stimulant in coffee, has been called the most widely used psychoactive 
substance on Earth. Sn yder, Daly and Bruns have recently proposed that caffeine affect 
behavior by countering the activity in the human brain of a naturally occurring chemical called 
adenosine. Adenosine normally depresses neuron firing in many areas of the brain. It 
apparently does this by i nhibiting the release of neurotransmitters, chemicals that carry nerve 
impulses from one neuron to the next. Like many other agents that affect neuron firing, 
adenosine must first bind to specific receptors on neuronal membranes. There are at least two 
classes of these receptors, which have been designated A 1 and A 2. Snyder et al propose that 
caffeine, which is structurally similar to adenosine, is able to bind to both types of receptors, 
which prevents adenosine from attaching  there and allows the neurons to fire more readily than 
they otherwise would.  
For many years, caffeines effects have been attributed to its inhibition of the production of 
phosphodiesterase, an enzyme that breaks down the chemical called cyclic AMP. A num ber of 
neurotransmitters exert their effects by first increasing cyclic AMP concentrations in target 
neurons. Therefore, prolonged periods at the elevated concentrations, as might be brought 
about by a phosphodiesterase inhibitor, could lead to a greater a mount of neuron firing and, 
consequently, to behavioral stimulation. But Snyder et al point out that the caffeine 
concentrations needed to inhibit the production of phosphodiesterase in the brain are much 
higher than those that produce stimulation. Moreove r, other compounds that block 
phosphodiesterases activity are not stimulants.  
To buttress their case that caffeine acts instead by preventing adenosine binding, Snyder et 
al compared the stimulatory effects of a series of caffeine derivatives with their a bility to 
dislodge adenosine from its receptors in the brains of mice. In general, they reported, the 
ability of the compounds to compete at the receptors correlates with their ability to stimulate 
locomotion in the mouse; i.e., the higher their capacit y to bind at the receptors, the higher their 
ability to stimulate locomotion. Theophylline, a close structural relative of caffeine and the 
major stimulant in tea, was one of the most effective compounds in both regards.  
There were some apparent exception s to the general correlation observed between 
adenosine -receptor binding and stimulation. One of these was a compound called 
3-isobuty l-1-methylxanthine (IBMX), which bound very well but actually depressed mouse 
locomotion. Snyder et al suggests that this is not a major stumbling block  to their hypothesis. 
The problem is that the compound has mixed effects in the brain, a not unusual occurrence 
with psychoactive drugs. Even caffeine, which is generally known only for its stimulatory effects, 
displays this property, depressi ng mouse locomotion at very low concentrations and stimulating 
it at higher ones.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) discuss a plan for investigation of a phenomenon that is not yet fully 
understood  
(B) present two explanations of a phenomenon  and reconcile the differences 
between them  26 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) summarize two theories and suggest a third theory that overcomes the 
problems encountered in the first two  
(D) describe an alternative hypothesis and provide evidence and arguments that 
support it  
(E) challenge the validity of a theory by exposing the inconsistencies and 
contradictions in it  
2. Which of the following, if true, would most weaken the theory proposed by 
Snyder et al?  
(A) At very low concentrations in the human brain , both caffeine and 
theophylline tend to have depressive rather than stimulatory effects on 
human behavior.  
(B) The ability of caffeine derivatives at very low concentrations to dislodge 
adenosine from its receptors in mouse brains correlates well with their 
ability to st imulate mouse locomotion at these low concentrations . 
(C) The concentration of cyclic AMP in target neurons in the human brain that 
leads to increased neuron firing can be produced by several different 
phosphodiesterase inhibitors in addition to caffeine.  
(D) The concentration of caffeine required to dislodge adenosine from its 
receptors in the human brain is much greater than the concentration that 
produces behavioral stimulation in humans.  
(E) The concentration of IBMX required to dislodge adenosine fr om its receptors 
in mouse brains is much smaller than the concentration that stimulates 
locomotion in the mouse.  
3. According so Snyder et al, caffeine differs from adenosine in that caffeine  
(A) stimulates behavior in the mouse and in humans, whereas aden osine 
stimulates behavior in humans only  
(B) has mixed effects in the brain, whereas adenosine has only a stimulatory 
effect  
(C) increases cyclic AMP concentrations in target neurons, whereas adenosine 
decreases such concentrations  
(D) permits release of n eurotransmitters when it is bound to adenosine receptors, 
whereas adenosine inhibits such release  
(E) inhibits both neuron firing and the production of phosphodiesterase when 
there is a sufficient concentration in the brain, whereas adenosine inhibits 
only neuron firing  
4. In response to experimental results concerning IBMX, Snyder et al contended 
that it is not uncommon for psychoactive drugs to have  
(A) mixed effects in the brain  
(B) inhibitory effects on enzymes in the brain  
(C) close structural relat ionships with caffeine   GMAT  27 
 (D) depressive effects on mouse locomotion  
(E) the ability to dislodge caffeine from receptors in the brain  
5. The passage suggests that Snyder et al believe that if the older theory concerning 
caffeines effects were correct, which of the following would have to be the case?  
I. All neurotransm itters would increase the short -term concentration of cyclic 
AMP in target neurons.  
II. Substances other than caffeine that inhibit the production of 
phosphodiesterase would be stimulants.  
III. All concentration levels of caffeine that are high enough to p roduce 
stimulation would also inhibit the production of phosphodiesterase.  
(A) I only 
(B) I and II only 
(C) I and  III only 
(D) II and III only 
(E) I, II, and III 
6. According to Snyder et al, all of the following compounds can bind to specific 
receptors in the brain EXCEPT  
(A) IBMX  
(B) caffeine  
(C) adenosine  
(D) theophylline  
(E) phosphodiesterase  
7. Snyder et al suggest that caffeines abi lity to bind to A 1 and A 2 receptors can be at 
least partially attributed to which of the following?  
(A) The chemical relationship between caffeine and phosphodiesterase  
(B) The structural relationship between caffeine and adenosine  
(C) The structural simil arity between caffeine and neurotransmitters  
(D) The ability of caffeine to stimulate behavior  
(E) The natural occurrence of caffeine and adenosine in the brain  
8. The author quotes Snyder et al in lines 38 -43 most probably in order to  
(A) reveal some of the assumptions underlying their theory  
(B) summarize a major finding of their experiments  
(C) point out that their experiments were limited to the mouse  
(D) indicate that their experiments resulted only in general correlations  
(E) refute the objections made by supporters of the older theory  
9. The last paragraph of the passage performs which of the following functions?  
(A) Describes a disconfirming experimental result and reports the explanation 28 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 given by Snyder et al in an attempt to reconcile this result with their theory.  
(B) Specifies the basis for the correlation observed by Snyder et al a nd presents 
an explanation in an attempt to make the correlation consistent with the 
operation of psychoactive drugs other than caffeine.  
(C) Elaborates the description of the correlation observed by Snyder et al and 
suggests an additional explanation in a n attempt to make the correlation 
consistent with the older theory.  
(D) Reports inconsistent experimental data and describes the method Snyder et al 
will use to reanalyze this data.  
(E) Provides an example of the hypothesis proposed by Snyder et al and relates 
this example to caffeines properties.