In the eighteenth century, Japans feudal overlords, from the shogun  to the humblest 
samurai , found themselves under financial stress. In part, this stress ca n be attributed to the 
overlords failure to adjust to a rapidly expanding economy, but the stress was also due to 
factors beyond the overlords control. Concentration of the samurai in castle -towns had acted 
as a stimulus to trade. Commercial efficiency, in turn, had put temptations in the way of buyers. 
Since most samurai had been reduced to idleness by years of peace, encouraged to engage in 
scholarship and martial exercises or to perform administrative tasks that took little time, it is not 
surprising t hat their tastes and habits grew expensive. Overlords income, despite the increase 
in rice production among their tenant farmers, failed to keep pace with their expenses. 
Although shortfalls in overlords income resulted almost as much from laxity among t heir tax 
collectors (the nearly inevitable outcome of hereditary office -holding) as from their higher 
standards of living, a misfortune like a fire or flood, bringing an increase in expenses or a drop 
in revenue, could put a domain in debt to the city rice -brokers who handled its finances. Once in 
debt, neither the individual samurai nor the shogun himself found it easy to recover.  
It was difficult for individual samurai overlords to increase their income because the 
amount of rice that farmers could be mad e to pay in taxes was not unlimited, and since the 
income of Japans central government consisted in part of taxes collected by the shogun from 
his huge domain, the government too was constrained. Therefore, the Tokugawa shoguns 
began to look to other sour ces for revenue. Cash profits from government -owned mines were 
already on the decline because the most easily worked deposits of silver and gold had been 
exhausted, although debasement of the coinage had compensated for the loss. Opening up 
new farmland wa s a possibility, but most of what was suitable had already been exploited and 
further reclamation was technically unfeasible. Direct taxation of the samurai themselves would 
be politically dangerous. This left the shoguns only commerce as a potential sourc e of 
government income.  
Most of the countrys wealth, or so it seemed, was finding its way into the hands of city 
merchants. It appeared reasonable that they should contribute part of that revenue to ease the 
shoguns burden of financing the state. A means  of obtaining such revenue was soon found by 
levying forced loans, known as goyo-kin; although these were not taxes in the strict sense, 
since they were irregular in timing and arbitrary in amount, they were high in yield. 
Unfortunately, they pushed up pri ces. Thus, regrettably, the Tokugawa shoguns search for 
solvency for the government made it increasingly difficult for individual Japanese who lived on  GMAT  15 
 fixed stipends to make ends meet.  
1. The passage is most probably an excerpt from  
(A) an economic histo ry of Japan  
(B) the memoirs of a samurai warrior  
(C) a modern novel about eighteenth -century Japan  
(D) an essay contrasting Japanese feudalism with its Western counterpart  
(E) an introduction to a collection of Japanese folktales  
2. Which of the following financial situations is most analogous to the financial 
situation in which Japans Tokugawa shoguns found themselves in the eighteenth 
century?  
(A) A small business bor rows heavily to invest in new equipment, but is able to 
pay off its debt early when it is awarded a lucrative government contract.  
(B) Fire destroys a small business, but insurance covers the cost of rebuilding.  
(C) A small business is turned down for a lo an at a local bank because the owners 
have no credit history . 
(D) A small business has to struggle to meet operating expenses when its profits 
decrease.  
(E) A small business is able to cut back sharply on spending through greater 
commercial efficiency and thereby compensate for a loss of revenue.  
3. Which of the following best describes the attitude of the author toward the 
samurai discussed in lines 11 -16? 
(A) Warmly approving  
(B) Mildly sympathetic  
(C) Bitterly disappointed  
(D) Harshly disdainful  
(E) Profoundly shocked  
4. According to the passage, the major reason for the financial problems 
experienced by Japans feudal ov erlords in the eighteenth century was that  
(A) spending had outdistanced income  
(B) trade had fallen off  
(C) profits from mining had declined  
(D) the coinage had been sharply debased  
(E) the samurai had concentrated in castle -towns  
5. The passage implie s that individual samurai did not find it easy to recover from 
debt for which of the following reasons?  
(A) Agricultural production had increased.  
(B) Taxes were irregular in timing and arbitrary in amount.  16 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) The Japanese government had failed to adjust to the needs of a changing 
economy.  
(D) The domains of samurai overlords were becoming smaller and poorer as 
government revenues increased.  
(E) There was a limit to the amount in taxes that farmers could be made to pay.  
6. The passage suggests that, in eighteenth -century Japan, the office of tax collector  
(A) was a source of personal profit to the officeholder  
(B) was regarded with derisio n by many Japanese  
(C) remained within families  
(D) existed only in castle -towns  
(E) took up most of the officeholders time  
7. Which of the following could best be substituted for the word This in line 47  
without changing th e meaning of the passage?  
(A) The search of Japans Tokugawa shoguns for solvency  
(B) The importance of commerce in feudal Japan  
(C) The unfairness of the tax structure in eighteenth  century Japan  
(D) The difficulty of increasing government income by other  means  
(E) The difficulty experienced by both individual samurai and the shogun himself 
in extricating themselves from debt  
8. The passage implies that which of the following was the primary reason why the 
Tokugawa shoguns turned to city merchants for help in  financing the state?  
(A) A series of costly wars had depleted the national treasury.  
(B) Most of the countrys wealth appeared to be in city merchants hands.  
(C) Japan had suffered a series of economic reversals due to natural disasters such 
as floods.  
(D) The merchants were already heavily indebted to the shoguns.  
(E) Further reclamation of land would not have been economically advantageous.  
9. According to the passage, the actions of the Tokugawa shoguns in their search for 
solvency for the government were regrettable because those actions  
(A) raised the cost o f living by pushing up prices  
(B) resulted in the exhaustion of the most easily worked deposits of silver and 
gold 
(C) were far lower in yield than had originally been anticipated  
(D) did not succeed in reducing government spending  
(E) acted as a deterr ent to trade