(The following is based on material written in 1996.)  
The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, signed in 1987 by 
more than 150 nations, has attained its short -term goals: it has decreased the rate of increase 
in amounts of most ozone -depleting chemicals reaching the atmosphere and has even reduced 
the atmospheric levels of some of them. The projection that the ozone layer will substantially 
recover fro m ozone depletion by 2050 is based on the assumption that the protocols 
regulations will be strictly followed. Yet there is considerable evidence of violations, particularly 
in the form of the release of ozone -depleting chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which are commonly 
used in the refrigeration, heating, and air conditioning industries. These violation s reflect 
industry attitudes; for example, in the United States, 48 percents of respondents in a recent 
survey of subscribers to Air Conditioning, Heating, and  Refrigeration News , an industry trade 
journal, said that they did not believe that CFCs damage the ozone layer. Moreover, some in the 
industry apparently do not want to pay for CFC substitutes, which can run five times the cost of 
CFCs. Consequently, a black market in imported illicit CFCs has grown. Estimates of the 
contraband CFC trade range from 10,000 to 22,000 tons a year, with most of the CFCs 
originating in India and China, whose agreements under the Protocol still allow them to produce 
CFCs. I n fact, the United States Customs Service reports that CFC -12 is a contraband problem 
second only to illicit drugs.  
283. According to the passage, which of the following best describes most 
ozone -depleting chemicals in 1996 as compared to those in 1987?  
(A) The levels of such chemicals in the atmosphere had decreased.  
(B) The number of such chemicals that reached the atmosphere had declined.  
(C) The amounts of such chemicals released had increased but the amounts that 
reached the atmosphere had decreased.  
(D) The rate of increase in amounts of such chemicals reaching the atmosphere 
had decreased.  
(E) The rate at which such chemicals were being reduced in the atmosphere had 
slowed.  
284. The author of the passage compares the smuggling of CFCs to the illicit drug 
trade most likely for which of the following reasons?  
(A) To qualify a previous cla im 
(B) To emphasize the extent of a problem   GMAT  291 
 (C) To provide an explanation for an earlier assertion  
(D) To suggest that the illicit CFC trade, likely the illicit drug trade, will continue 
to increase  
(E) To suggest that the consequences of a relatively l ittle-know n problem are as 
serious as those of a well -known one  
285. The passage suggests which of the following about the illicit trade in CFCs?  
(A) It would cease if manufacturers in India and China stopped producing CFCs.  
(B) Most people who participa te in such trade do not believe that CFCs deplete 
the ozone layer.  
(C) It will probably surpass illicit drugs as the largest contraband problem faced 
by the United States Custom Services.  
(D) It is fostered by people who do not want to pay the price of CF C substitutes.  
(E) It has grown primarily because of the expansion of the refrigeration, heating, 
and air -conditioning industries in foreign countries.  