The sensation of pain  cannot accurately be described as located at the point of an injury, 
or, for that m atter, in any one place in the nerves or brain. Rather, pain signals and pain 
reliefare delivered through a highly complex interacting circuitry.  
When a cell is injured, a rush of prostaglandins sensitizes ne rve endings at the injury.  GMAT  103 
 Prostaglandins are chemicals produced in and released from virtually all mammalian cells when 
they are injured: these are the only pain signals that do not originate in the nervous system. 
Aspirin and other similar drugs (such as  indomethacin and ibuprofen) keep prostaglandins from 
being made by interfering with an enzyme known as prostaglandin synthetase, or 
cyclooxygenase. The drugs effectiveness against pain is proportional to their success in 
blocking this enzyme at the site of injury.  
From nerve endings at the injury, pain signa ls move to nerves feeding into the spinal cord . 
The long, tubular membranes of nerve cells carry electrical impulses. When electrical impulses 
get to the spinal cord, a pain -signaling chemical known as substance P is released there. 
Substance P then excites nearby neurons to send impulses to the br ain. Local anesthetics such 
as novocaine and xylocaine work by blocking the electrical transmission along nerves in a 
particular area. They inhibit the flow of sodium ions through the membranes, making the 
nerves electrically quiescent; thus no pain signal s are sent to the spinal cord or to the brain.  
Recent discoveries in the study of pain have involved the brain itself the supervising 
organ that notices pain signals and that sends messages down to the spinal cord to regulate 
incoming pain traffic. Endorph insthe brains own morphine are a class of small peptides that 
help to block pain signals within the brain itself. The presence of endorphins may also help to 
explain differences in response to pain signals, since individuals seem to differ in their abili ty to 
produce endorphins. It now appears that a number of techniques for blocking chronic 
painsuch as acupuncture and electrical stimulation of the central brain stem involve the 
release of endorphins in the brain and spinal cord.  
1. The passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) analyzing ways that enzymes and other chemicals influence how the body 
feels pain  
(B) describing the presence of endorphins in the brain and discussing ways the 
body blocks pain within the brain itself  
(C) describing how pain signals are conveyed in the body and discussing ways in 
which the pain signals can be blocked  
(D) demonstrating that pain can be influenced by acupuncture and electrical 
stimulation of the central brain stem  
(E) differentiating the kinds of pain that occur at different points in the bodys 
nervous system  
2. According to the passage, which of the following is one of the first things to 
occur when cells are injured?  
(A) The flow of electrical impulses throug h nerve cells at the site of the injury is 
broken.  
(B) The production of substance P traveling through nerve cells to the brain 
increases.  
(C) Endorphins begin to speed up the response of nerve cells at the site of the 
injury.  
(D) A flood of prostaglandins  sensitizes nerve endings at the site of the injury.  104 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) Nerve cells connected to the spinal cord become electrically quiescent.  
3. Of the following, which is most likely attributable to the effect of endorphins as 
described in the passage?  
(A) After an injection of novocaine, a patient has no feeling in  the area where the 
injection was given.  
(B) After taking ibuprofen, a person with a headache gets quick relief.  
(C) After receiving a local anesthetic, an injured person reports relief in the 
anesthetized area.  
(D) After being given aspirin, a child with a badly scraped elbow feels better.  
(E) After acupuncture, a patient with chronic back pain reports that the pain is 
much less severe.  
4. It can be inferred from the passage that if the prostaglandin synthetase is only 
partially blocked, which of the following is likely to be true?  
(A) S ome endorphins will be produced, and some pain signals will be intensified.  
(B) Some substance P is likely to be produced, so some pain signals will reach the 
brain.  
(C) Some sodium ions will be blocked, so some pain signals will not reach the 
brain.  
(D) S ome prostaglandins will be produced, but production of substance P will be 
prevented.  
(E) Some peptides in the brain will receive pain signals and begin to regulate 
incoming pain traffic.