Australian researchers have discovered electroreceptors (sensory organs designed to 
respond to electrical fields) clustered at the tip of the spiny anteaters  snout. The researchers 
made this discovery by exposing small areas of the snout to extremely weak electrical fields and 
recording the transmission of resulting nervous activity to the brain. While it is true that tactile 
receptors, another kind of sensory organ on the anteaters snout, can also respond to elec trical 
stimuli, such receptors do so only in response to electrical field strengths about 1,000 times 
greater than those known to excite electroreceptors.  
Having discovered the electroreceptors, researchers are now investigating how anteaters 
utilize such a sophisticated sensory system. In one behavioral experiment, researchers 
successfully trained an anteater to distinguish between two troughs of water, one with a weak 
electrical field and the other with none. Such evidence is consistent with researchers 
hypothesis that anteaters use electroreceptors to detect electrical signals given off by prey; 
however, researchers as yet have been unable to detect electrical signals emanating from 
termite mounds, where the favorite food of anteaters live. Still, resear chers have observed 
anteaters breaking into a nest of ants at an oblique angle  and quickly locating nesting chambers. 
This ability quickly to locate unseen prey suggests, according to the researchers, that the 
anteaters were us ing their electroreceptors to locate the nesting chambers.  
1. According to the passage, which of the following is a characteristic that 
distinguishes electroreceptors from tactile receptors?  122 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) The manner in which electroreceptors respond to electrical st imuli  
(B) The tendency of electroreceptors to be found in clusters  
(C) The unusual locations in which electroreceptors are found in most species  
(D) The amount of electrical stimulation required to excite electroreceptors  
(E) The amount of nervous activity transmitted to the brain by electroreceptors 
when they are excited  
2. Which of the following can be inferred about the experiment described in the first 
paragraph?  
(A) Researchers had difficulty verifying the existenc e of electroreceptors in the 
anteater because electroreceptors respond to such a narrow range of 
electrical field strengths.  
(B) Researchers found that the level of nervous activity in the anteaters brain 
increased dramatically as the strength of the elec trical stimulus was 
increased.  
(C) Researchers found that some areas of the anteaters snout were not sensitive 
to a weak electrical stimulus.  
(D) Researchers found that the anteaters tactile receptors were more easily 
excited by a strong electrical stimu lus than were the electroreceptors.  
(E) Researchers tested small areas of the anteaters snout in order to ensure that 
only electroreceptors were responding to the stimulus.  
3. The author of the passage most probably discusses the function of tactile 
receptors (lines 7 -11) in order to  
(A) eliminate and alternative explanation of anteaters response to electrical 
stimuli  
(B) highlight a type of sensory organ that has a function identical to that of 
electroreceptors  
(C) point out a serious complication in the research on electroreceptors in 
anteaters  
(D) suggest that tactile receptors assist electroreceptors in the detection of 
electrical signals  
(E) introduce a factor that was not addressed in the research on electroreceptors in 
anteaters  
4. Which of the following can be inferred about anteaters from the behavioral 
experiment mentioned in the second paragraph?  
(A) They are unable to distinguis h between stimuli detected by their 
electroreceptors and stimuli detected by their tactile receptors.  
(B) They are unable to distinguish between the electrical signals emanating from 
termite mounds and those emanating from ant nests.  
(C) They can be traine d to recognize consistently the presence of a particular  GMAT  123 
 stimulus.  
(D) They react more readily to strong than to weak stimuli.  
(E) They are more efficient at detecting stimuli in a controlled environment than 
in a natural environment.  
5. The passage suggests that the researchers mentioned in the second paragraph who 
observed anteaters break into a nest of ants would most likel y agree with which 
of the following statements?  
(A) The event they observed provides conclusive evidence that anteaters use their 
electroreceptors to locate unseen prey.  
(B) The event they observed was atypical and may not reflect the usual hunting 
practic es of anteaters.  
(C) It is likely that the anteaters located the ants nesting chambers without the 
assistance of electroreceptors.  
(D) Anteaters possess a very simple sensory system for use in locating prey.  
(E) The speed with which the anteaters located their prey is greater than what 
might be expected on the basis of chance alone.  
6. Which of the following, if true, would most strengthen the hypothesis mentioned 
in lines 17 -19? 
(A) Researchers are able t o train anteaters to break into an underground chamber 
that is emitting a strong electrical signal.  
(B) Researchers are able to detect a weak electrical signal emanating from the 
nesting chamber of an ant colony.  
(C) Anteaters are observed taking increasin gly longer amounts of time to locate 
the nesting chambers of ants.  
(D) Anteaters are observed using various angles to break into nests of ants.  
(E) Anteaters are observed using the same angle used with nests of ants to break 
into the nests of other types of prey.