Comparable worth is a concept that rejects the premise of a separate and lower wage 
hierarchy for jobs that are done primarily by women, arguing instead that earnings should 
reflect  only the worth of the work performed. This worth should be determined by an evaluation 
system  that rates jobs according to their social importance and skill requirements. Because 
comparable worth does not attack all forms of inequality, it can have only a  modest direct effect 
on the overall degree of inequality in society, but in attacking gender inequality in the job 
classification system it attacks a major component of gender inequality in the United States. 
The likelihood that other forms of inequality will become more manifest with the lessening of 
gender inequality is not a valid argument against comparable worth. Indeed, struggles for 
comparable worth may help launch campaigns against similar forms of inequity. Still, while 
conservatives have battled hard against comparable worth, radicals have been reluctant to fight 
for it because they see the narrow presentations in comparable worth litigation as the limits of 
the concept. But in addition to helping redress particular inequities, comparable worth co uld 
open a discussion of the entire  wage system. Its theoretical and political impact will reach far 
beyond the framework in which it was conceived and force a rethinking of assumptions 
underlying current employment practices and the market itself.  
How com parable worth will affect the hierarchy of wages is more difficult to foresee. It 
does not directly challenge the concept of a hierarchy; in fact, its insistence that jobs must be 
evaluated implies a hierarchy. However, its rejection of the market as an ad equate basis for 
determining wages initiates a discussion of how value should be assigned to jobs. Advocates of 
comparable worth have challenged prevailing standards of evaluation, which them from formal 
job ovalions first developed in industrial settings.  These evaluations, based on points awarded 
for different job tasks, gave considerable emphasis to such activities as strenuous lifting and 
the operation of expensive equipment. Consequently, the skills and knowledge more typical of 
work done by women are less heavily emphasized. The `Dictionary of Occupational Titles  
reveals numerous current instances of such imbalance in job ratings.  
While comparable -worth advocates accept the principle of a hierarchy of wages, arguing 
only that they seek more objective measures of job worth, the issues they raise provoke a 
broader debate. This debate does not, as the opponents have claimed, concern the feasibility of 
setting up and applying evaluative standards. Employers have done that for centuries. Rather, 
the debate is about the social values and priorities underlying the wage hierarchy and, 
ultimately, the market where age -old conventions and political, as opposed to purely economic, 
forces enter the process of setting wages.  
1. Which of the following summarizes a ma in point of the passage?   GMAT  207 
 (A) The history of comparable worth closely parallels the history of changes in 
the structure of the economic system.  
(B) The ultimate success of comparable worth depends on a public discussion of 
the historical conditions that led  to its formulation.  
(C) Comparable worth has social implications that extend beyond specific 
adjustments to the wage hierarchies for men and women.  
(D) Comparable worth is gaining adherents even though it has traditionally met 
with organized opposition.  
(E) Comparable worth has been instrumental in affording women access to jobs 
that had been held largely by men.  
2. It can be inferred that the phrase a separate and lower wage hierarchy for jobs that 
are done primarily by women, as used in lines 2 -3 of t he passage, most nearly 
means which of the following?  
(A) That there is a greater range of salaries for men than for women  
(B) That women typically receive less money than men do for doing jobs of 
approximately the same value  
(C) That there are fewer wage -earning women than men in the work force  
(D) That men have traditionally been more likely than women to receive 
advancement on the basis of seniority  
(E) That men and women typically do not compete for the same jobs  
3. In the first paragraph of the passage, the author describes the potential role and 
function of comparable worth in language that most often suggests  
(A) artistic endeavors  
(B) busines s transactions  
(C) criminal investigations  
(D) military operations  
(E) scientific experiments  
4. It can be inferred from the passage that advocates of comparable worth believe 
which of the following?  
(A) A given kind of work has a particular inherent va lue to the employer or to 
society.  
(B) The market is more influenced by political and social forces now than it was 
in the past.  
(C) Gender inequality in the United States is primarily a product of the  current 
economic system.  
(D) Conservatives and radical s have the same reasons for not supporting 
comparable worth.  
(E) Those who devised job -evaluation standards were more interested in 
economic than political issues.  208 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 5. As used by the author in line 2 of the last paragraph, more objective  most 
nearly means  
(A) more quantifiable  
(B) more seminal  
(C) less categori cal 
(D) less job -specific  
(E) less sex -biased  
6. Which of the following best represents the sort of question at issue in the 
broader debate  referred to in line 48 above?  
(A) What political factors have affected the relationship between wages and 
job-evaluation ratings?  
(B) What gains have been achieved in the struggle for comparable -worth 
legislation?  
(C) Will a new standard for job evaluation be any more workable than the current 
one?  
(D) How will the balance of supply and demand be affected by compar able 
worth?  
(E) How soon is it reasonable to expect the passage of stronger comparable -worth 
legislation?  
7. According to the passage, which of the following is the most likely application of 
the notion of comparable worth?  
(A) The detailed explanation of the vari ous forces that guide the market  
(B) The formulation of attitudes about the role of supply and demand in setting 
wages  
(C) The establishment of a political coalition in the struggle against inequity  
(D) The integration of the industrial work force into the  job market for a service 
and technology economy  
(E) The reassessment of job characteristics as a means for determining just 
compensation  
8. It can be inferred from the passage that radicals have not supported comparable 
worth because they view it as being  
(A) unrelated to historic developments that have molded the current economic 
system  
(B) an integral part of the same system that has institutionalized various forms of 
inequity  
(C) likely to undermine the unity of a reform move -men by polarizing the 
different interest groups  
(D) too limited and rest ricted in its uses to promote fundamental changes in the 
system   GMAT  209 
 (E) inherently flawed in that it has given rise to the concept of a wage hierarchy  
9. The author s primary purpose in the passage is to  
(A) criticize inconsistent experiments  
(B) suggest a new direction for research  
(C) describe an intriguing geophysic al phenomenon  
(D) present evidence supporting a theory  
(E) evaluate data relating to lunar geology