The National Security Act  of 1947 created a national military establishment  headed by a 
single Secretary of Defense. The le gislation had been a year -and-a-half in the 
making beginning when President Truman first recommended that the armed services be 
reorganized into a single department. During that period the President s concept of a unified 
armed service was torn apart and p ut back together several times, the final measure to emerge 
from Congress being a compromise. Most of the opposition to the bill came from the Navy and 
its numerous civilian spokesmen, including Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal. In support of 
unification (and a separate air force that was part of the unific ation package) were the Army air 
forces, the Army, and, most importantly, the President of the United States.  174 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Passage of the bill did not bring an end to the bitter interservice disputes. Rather than unify, 
the act served only to federate  the military services. It neither halted the rapid demobilization of 
the armed forces that followed World War II nor brought to the new national military 
establishment the loyalties of officers steeped in the traditions of the separate services. A t a 
time when the balance of power in Europe and Asia was rapidly shifting, the services lacked any 
precise statement of United States foreign policy from the National Security Council on which to 
base future programs. The services bickered unceasingly ove r their respective roles and 
missions, already complicated by the Soviet nuclear capability that for the first time made the 
United States subject to devastating attack. Not even the appointment of Forrestal as First 
Secretary of Defense allayed the suspic ions of naval officers and their supporters that the role 
of the U.S. Navy was threatened with permanent eclipse. Before the war of words died down, 
Forrestal himself was driven to resignation and then suicide.  
By 1948, the United States military establish ment was forced to make do with a budget 
approximately 10 percent of what it had been at its wartime peak. Meanwhile, the cost of 
weapons procurement was rising geometrically as the nation came to put more and more 
reliance on the atomic bomb and its deliv ery systems. These two factors inevitably made 
adversaries of the Navy and the Air Force as the battle between advocates of the B -36 and the 
supercarrier so amply demonstrates. Given severe fiscal restraints on the one hand, and on the 
other the nation s increasing reliance on strategic nuclear deterrence, the conflict between 
these two services over roles and missions was essentially a contest over slices of an 
ever-diminishing pie.  
Yet if in the end neither service was the obvious victor, the principle of  civilian dominance 
over the military clearly was. If there had ever been any danger that the United States military 
establishment might exploit, to the detriment of civilian control, the goodwill it enjoyed as a 
result of its victories in World War II, th at danger disappeared in the interservice animosities 
engendered by the battle over unification.  
1. The author makes all of the following points about the National Security Act of 
1947 EXCEPT  
(A) It provided for a single Secretary of Defense.  
(B) The legis lation that came out of Congress was a compromise measure.  
(C) The legislation was initially proposed by President Truman.  
(D) The Navy opposed the bill that eventually became law.  
(E) The bill was passed to help the nation s demobilization effort.  
2. Which of the following best describes the tone of the selection?  
(A) Analytical and confident  
(B) Resentful and defensive  
(C) Objective and speculative  
(D) Tentative and skeptical  
(E) Persuasive and cynical  
3. According to the passage, the interservice s trife that followed unification  GMAT  175 
 occurred primarily between the  
(A) Army and Army air forces  
(B) Army and Navy  
(C) Army air forces and Navy  
(D) Navy and Army  
(E) Air Force and Navy  
4. It can be inferred from the passage that Forrestal s appointment as Se cretary of 
Defense was expected to  
(A) placate members of the Navy  
(B) result in decreased levels of defense spending  
(C) outrage advocates of the Army air forces  
(D) win Congressional approval of the unification plan  
(E) make Forrestal a Presidential c andidate against Truman  
5. According to the passage, President Truman supported which of the following??  
I. Elimination of the Navy  
II. A unified military service  
III. Establishment of a separate air force  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II an d III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
6. With which of the following statements about defense unification would the 
author most likely agree?  
(A) Unification ultimately undermined United States military capability by 
inciting interservice rivalry.  
(B) The unification leg islation was necessitated by the drastic decline in 
appropriations for the military services.  
(C) Although the unification was not entirely successful, it had the unexpected 
result of ensuring civilian control of the military.  
(D) In spite of the attempted  unification, each service was still able to pursue its 
own objectives without interference from the other branches.  
(E) Unification was in the first place unwarranted and in the second place 
ineffective.  
7. According to the selection, the political situation following the passage of the 
National Security Act of 1947 was characterized by all of the following EXCEPT  
(A) a shifting balance of power in Europe and in Asia  176 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) fierce interservice rivalries  
(C) lack of strong leadership by the National Security Council  
(D) shrinking postwar military budgets  
(E) a lame -duck  President who was unable to unify the legislature  
8. The author cites the resignation and suicide of Forr estal in order to  
(A) underscore the bitterness of the interservice rivalry surrounding the passage 
of the National Security Act  of 1947  
(B) demonstrate that the Navy eventually emerged as the dominant branch of 
service after the passage of the National Se curity Act  of 1947  
(C) suggest that the nation would be better served by a unified armed service 
under a single command  
(D) provide an example of a military leader who preferred to serve his country in 
war rather than in peace  
(E) persuade the reader th at Forrestal was a victim of political opportunists and an 
unscrupulous press  
9. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) discussing the influence of personalities on political events  
(B) describing the administration of a powerful leader  
(C) criticizing  a piece of legislation  
(D) analyzing a political development  
(E) suggesting methods for controlling the military