The antigen -antibody immunological reaction used to be regarded as typical of 
immunological responses. Antibodies are proteins synthesized by spe cialized cells called plasma 
cells, which are formed by lymphocytes (cells from the lymph system) when an antigen, a 
substance foreign to the organism s body, comes in contact with lymphocytes. Two important 
manifestations of antigen -antibody immunity are lysis, the rapid physical rupture of antigenic 
cells and the liberation of their contents into the surrounding medium, and phagocytosis, a 
process in which antigenic particles are engulfed by and very often digested by macrophages 
and polymorphs. The proce ss of lysis is executed by a complex and unstable blood constituent 
known as complement, which will not work unless it is activated by a specific antibody; the 
process of  phagocytosis is greatly facilitated when the particles to be engulfed are coated by a  
specific antibody directed against them.  
The reluctance to abandon this hypothesis, however well it explains specific processes, 
impeded new research, and for many years  antigens and antibodies dominated the thoughts of 
immunologists so completely that th ose immunologists overlooked certain difficulties. Perhaps  
the primary difficulty with the antigen -antibody explanation is the informational problem of how 
an antigen is recognized and how a structure exactly complementary to it is then synthesized. 
When m olecular biologists discovered, moreover, that such information cannot flow from 
protein to protein, but only from nucleic acid to protein, the theory that an antigen itself 
provided the mold that directed the synthesis of an antibody had to be seriously q ualified. The 
attempts at qualification and the information provided by research in molecular biology led 
scientists to realize that a second immunological reaction is mediated through the lymphocytes 
that are hostile to and bring about the destruction of the antigen. This type of immunological 
response is called cell -mediated immunity.  
Recent research in cell -mediated immunity has been concerned not only with the 
development of new and better vaccines, but also with the problem of transplanting tissues and  
organs from  one organism to another, for although circulating antibodies play a part in the 
rejection of transplanted tissues, the primary role is played by cell -mediated reactions. During 
cell-mediated responses, receptor sites on specific lymphocytes an d surface antigens on the 
foreign tissue cells form a complex that binds the lymphocytes to the tissue. Such lymphocytes 
do not give rise to antibody -producing plasma cells but themselves bring about the death of the 
foreign -tissue cells, probably by secre ting a variety of substances, some of which are toxic to 
the tissue cells and some of which stimulate increased phagocytic activity by white blood cells 
of the macrophage type. Cell -mediated immunity also accounts for the destruction of 
intracellular paras ites. 
1. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) proving that immunological reactions do not involve antibodies  
(B) establishing that most immunological reactions involve antigens  
(C) criticizing scientists who will not change their theories regarding i mmunology   GMAT  159 
 (D) analyzing the importance of cells in fighting disease  
(E) explaining two different kinds of immunological reactions  
2. The author argues that the antigen -antibody explanation of immunity had to 
seriously qualified (line 37) because  
(A) a ntibodies were found to activate unstable components in the blood  
(B) antigens are not exactly complementary to antibodies  
(C) lymphocytes have the ability to bind to the surface of antigens  
(D) antibodies are synthesized from protein whereas antigens are made from 
nucleic acid  
(E) antigens have no apparent mechanism to direct the formation of an antibody  
3. The author most probably believes that the antigen -antibody theory of 
immunological reaction.  
(A) is wrong  
(B) was accepted without evidence  
(C) is unverifiable  
(D) is a partial explanation  
(E) has been a divisive issue among scientists  
4. The author mentions all of the following as being involved in antigen -antibody 
immunological reactions EXCEPT the  
(A) synthesis of a protein  
(B) activation of complement in the bloods tream  
(C) destruction of antibodies  
(D) entrapment of antigens by macrophages  
(E) formation of a substance with a structure complementary to that of an antigen  
5. The passage contains information that would answer which of the following 
questions about cell-mediated immunological reactions?  
I. Do lymphocytes form antibodies during cell -mediated immunological 
reactions?  
II. Why are lymphocytes more hostile to antigens during cell -mediated 
immunological reactions than are other cell groups?  
III. Are cell -mediated reactions more pronounced after transplants than they are 
after parasites have invaded the organism?  
(A) I only  
(B) I and II only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  160 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 6. The passage suggests that scientists might not have developed the theory of 
cell-mediated immunological reactions if  
(A) proteins existed in specific group types  
(B) proteins could have been shown to direct the synthesis of other proteins  
(C) antigens were always destroyed by proteins  
(D) antibodies were composed only of protein  
(E) antibodies were the body s primary means of resisting disease  
7. According to the passage, antibody -antigen and cell -mediated immunological 
reaction s both involve which of the following processes?  
I. The destruction of antigens  
II. The creation of antibodies  
III. The destruction of intracellular parasites  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) I and II only  
(E) II and III only  
8. The author suppor ts the theory of cell -mediated reactions primarily by  
(A) pointing out a contradiction in the assumption leading to the antigen -antibody 
theory  
(B) explaining how cell mediation accounts for phenomena that the 
antigen -antibody theory cannot account for  
(C) revealing new data that scientists arguing for the antigen -antibody theory 
have continued to ignore  
(D) showing that the antigen -antibody theory fails to account for the breakup of 
antigens  
(E) demonstrating that cell mediation explains lysis and phagocytosis more fully 
than the antigen -antibody theory does