Two modes of argumentation have been used on behalf of womens emancipation in 
Western societies. Arguments in what could be called the relational femi nist tradition maintain 
the doctrine of equality in  difference, or equity as distinct for equality. They posit that 
biological distinctions between the sexes result in a necessary sexual division of labor  in the 
family and throughout society and that womens procreative  labor is currently undervalued by 
society, to the disadvantage of women. By contrast, the individualist feminist tradition 
emphasizes individual human rights and celebrates women s quest for personal autonomy, 
while downplaying the importance of gender roles and minimizing discussion of childbearing 
and its attendant  responsibilities.  
Before  the late nineteenth century, these views coexisted within the feminist movement, 
often within the writings of the same individual. Between 1890 and 1920, however, relational 
feminism, which had been the dominant strain in feminist thought, and which still  predominates 
among European and non -Western feminists, lost ground in England and the United States. 
Because the concept of individual rights was already well established in the Anglo -Saxon legal 
and political tradition, individualist feminism came to pre dominate in English -speaking countries. 
At the same time, the goals of the two approaches began to seem increasingly irreconcilable. 
Individualist feminists began to advocate a totally gender -blind system with equal rights for all. 
Relational feminists, wh ile agreeing that equal educational and economic opportunities outside 
the home should be available for all women, continued to emphasize womens special 
contributions to society as homemakers and mothers; they demanded special treatment 
including protecti ve legislation for women workers, state -sponsored maternity benefits, and 
paid compensation for housework.  138 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Relational arguments have a major pitfall: because they underline womens physiological 
and psychological distinctiveness, they are often appropriate d by political adversaries and used 
to endorse male privilege. But the individualist approach, by attacking gender roles, denying 
the significance of physiological difference, and condemning existing fami lial institutions as 
hopelessly patriarchal, has often simply treated as irrelevant the family roles important to many 
women. If the individualist framework, with its claim for womens autonomy, could be 
harmonized with the family -oriented concerns of rela tional feminists, a more fruitful model for 
contemporary feminist politics could emerge.  
1. The author of the passage alludes to the well -established nature of the concept of 
individual rights in the Anglo -Saxon legal and political tradition in order to  
(A) illustrate the influence of individualist feminist thought on more general 
intellectual trends in English history  
(B) argue that feminism was already a part of the larger Anglo -Saxon intellectual 
tradition, even though this has often gone unnoticed by cr itics of womens 
emancipation  
(C) explain the decline in individualist thinking among feminists in 
non-English -speaking countries  
(D) help account for an increasing shift toward individualist feminism among 
feminists in English -speaking countries  
(E) ac count for the philosophical differences between individualist and relational 
feminists in English -speaking countries  
2. The passage suggests that the author of the passage believes which of the 
following?  
(A) The predominance of individualist feminism in E nglish -speaking countries is 
a historical phenomenon, the causes of which have not yet been investigated.  
(B) The individualist and relational feminist views are irreconcilable, given their 
theoretical differences concerning the foundations of society.  
(C) A consensus concerning the direction of future feminist politics will probably 
soon emerge, given the awareness among feminists of the need for 
cooperation among women.  
(D) Political adversaries of feminism often misuse arguments predicated on 
differences  between the sexes to argue that the existing social system should 
be maintained.  
(E) Relational feminism provides the best theoretical framework for 
contemporary feminist politics, but individualist feminism could contribute 
much toward refining and strengthening modern feminist thought.  
3. It can be inferred from the passage that the individualist feminist tradition denies 
the validity of which of the following causal statements?  
(A) A division of labor in a social group can result in increased efficiency with 
regard to the performance of group tasks.   GMAT  139 
 (B) A division of labor in a s ocial group causes inequities in the distribution of 
opportunities and benefits among group members.  
(C) A division of labor on the basis of gender in a social group is necessitated by 
the existence of sex -linked biological differences between male and fem ale 
members of the group.  
(D) Culturally determined distinctions based on gender in a social group foster 
the existence of differing attitudes and opinions among group members.  
(E) Educational programs aimed at reducing inequalities based on gender amon g 
members of a social group can result in a sense of greater well -being for all 
members of the group.  
4. According to the passage, relational feminists and individualist feminists agree 
that 
(A) individual human rights take precedence over most other socia l claims  
(B) the gender -based division of labor in society should be eliminated  
(C) laws guaranteeing equal treatment for all citizens regardless of gender should 
be passed  
(D) a greater degree of social awareness concerning the importance of 
motherhood wo uld be beneficial to society  
(E) the same educational and economic opportunities should be available to both 
sexes  
5. According to the author, which of the following was true of feminist thought in 
Western societies before 1890?  
(A) Individualist feminist arguments were not found in the thought or writing of 
non-English -speaking feminists.  
(B) Individualist feminism was a strain in feminist thought, but another strain, 
relational feminism, predominated.  
(C) Relational and indiv idualist approaches were equally prevalent in feminist 
thought and writing.  
(D) The predominant view among feminists held that the welfare of women was 
ultimately less important than the welfare of children.  
(E) The predominant view among feminists held that the sexes should receive 
equal treatment under the law.  
6. The author implies that which of the following was true of most feminist thinkers 
in England and the United States after 1920?  
(A) They were l ess concerned with politics than with intellectual issues.  
(B) They began to reach a broader audience and their programs began to be 
adopted by mainstream political parties.  
(C) They called repeatedly for international cooperation among womens groups 
to achieve their goals.  140 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) They moderated their initial criticism of the economic systems that 
characterized their societies.  
(E) They did not attempt to unite the two different feminist approaches in their 
thought.