A majority taken collectively may be regarded as a being whose opinions and, most 
frequently, whose interests are opposed to those of  another being, which is styled a minority. If 
it is admitted that a man possessing absolute power may misuse that power by wronging his 
adversaries, why should a majority not be liable to the same reproach? Men are not apt to 
change their characters by ag glomeration; nor does their patience in the presence of  obstacles 
increase with the consciousness  of their strength. For these reasons we should not willingly 
invest any group of our fellows with that unlimited authority which we should refuse to any 
individual.  
One social power must always predominate ove r others, but liberty is endangered when 
this power is checked by no obstacles  which may retard its course and force it to moderate its 
own vehemence. Unlimited  power is in itself a bad and dangerous thing, and no power on eart h 
is so worthy of honor for itself or of reverential obedience to the rights which it represents that 
we should admit its uncontrolled and all -predominant authority. When the right and means of 
absolute command are conferred on a people or a king, on an ar istocracy or a democracy, a 
monarchy or a republic, there has been implanted the germ of tyranny.  
The main evil of the present democratic institutions of the United States does not arise, as 
is often asserted in Europe, from their weakness, but from their overpowering strength; the 
excessive liberty which reigns in that country is not so alarming as is the very inadequate 
security which exists against tyranny.  
When an individual or a party is wronged  in the United States, to whom can he apply for 
redress? If to the public opinion, public opinion  constitutes the majority; if to the legislature, it 
represents the majority and implicitly  obeys its injunctions; if to the executive power, it is 
appointed by the majority and remains a passive tool in its hands ; the public troops consist of 
the m ajority under arms; the jury is the majority invested with the right of hearing judicial cases, 
and in certain states even the judges are elected by the majority. However iniquitous or absurd 
the evil complained about, no sure barrier  is established to def end against it.  234 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 1. Which of the following would be the most appropriate title for the passage?  
(A) The Tyranny of the Majority  
(B) Democracy: Triumph of the People  
(C) Abuses of Power  
(D) The Failure of Democracy in the United S tates 
(E) Minority Rights  
2. Which of the following  best paraphrases the author s statement in the third 
sentence of paragraph 1 (lines 7 -11)? 
(A) Individuals do not change their behavior when they act in concert with  others 
who are likeminded, and, knowing they are acting as part of the group, they 
are not likely to show greater restraint when opposed than they would if they 
were acting individually.  
(B) Groups are not different from one another, they all show strong impatience  
when thwarted.  
(C) The character of men is formed by the accumulation  of their traits, and 
patience is not a common trait among  men of strength.  
(D) The leopard does not change its spots no matter how long it lives, and it is, 
and remains, patient in the presence of obstacles . 
(E) Men change their behavior when they act in groups; they are more patient 
when they are in the company of their fellows than they are when they are 
alone.  
3. With which of the following  statements would the author of the passag e be most 
likely to agree?  
(A) Democracy is no greater defense against tyranny than is monarchy or 
aristocracy.  
(B) Minority rule would probably be more responsive to the needs of all people 
than majority rule.  
(C) No government  should be trusted since all  governments are equally 
tyrannical.  
(D) Since one social power must always predominate over others, it is futile to 
provide checks and balances in government.  
(E) To render itself immune to the germ of tyranny, the United States should 
strengthen its political institutions . 
4. Which of the following , assuming that each is true, would most weaken the point 
that the author is making in the last two paragraphs of the passage?  
(A) The framers of the U.S. Constitution deliberately separated the three branches 
of the government to prevent tyranny.  
(B) There is not a single  majority in the United States; there are many majorities, 
each composed of  a different collec tion of individuals and each acting as a  GMAT  235 
 restraint on the others.  
(C) The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution specifically  guarantees the 
right of each citizen to petition the government for redress of grievances . 
(D) Even though the United States is not a direct democracy, all U.S. citizens 
have an equal opportunity to participate in political  life and to hold public 
office.  
(E) The framers of the U.S. Constitution had two primary concerns: to prevent the 
government from exercising tyranny over the  people and to prevent the 
majority from exercising tyranny over the minority.  
5. The author s treatment of the topic of the passage can best be described as  
(A) ironic  
(B) neutral  
(C) logical  
(D) irreverent  
(E) diffident  
6. In the passage, the author i s primarily concerned with  
(A) challenging  a commonly held belief  
(B) contrasting two opposing views  
(C) advocating a course of action  
(D) reconciling an apparent conflict  
(E) proposing a solution to an unrecognized problem