Two recent pu blications offer different assessment of the career of the famous British 
nurse Florence Nightingale. A book by Anne Summers seeks to debunk the idealizations and 
present a reality at odds with Nightingales heroic reputation. According to Summers, 
Nightin gales importance during the Crimean War has been exaggerated: not until near the 
wars end did she become supervisor of the female nurses.  Additionally, Summers writes that 
the contribution of the nurses to the relief of the wounded was at best marginal. The prevailing 
problems of military medicine were caused by army organizational practices, and the addition 
of a few nurses to the medical staff could be no more than symbolic. Nightingales place in the 
national pantheon, Summers asserts, is largely due t o the propagandistic efforts of 
contemporary newspaper reporters.  
By contrast, the editors of a new volume of Nightingales letters view Nightingale as a 
person who significantly influenced not only her own age but also subsequent generations. 
They highlig ht her ongoing efforts to reform sanitary conditions after the war. For example, 
when she learned that peacetime living conditions in British barracks were so horrible that the 
death rate of enlisted men far exceeded that of neighboring civilian population s, she succeeded 
in persuading the government to establish a Royal Commission on the Health of the Army. She 
used sums raised through public contributions to found a nurses training hospital in London. 
Even in administrative matters, the editors assert, h er practical intelligence  was formidable: as 
recently as 1947 the British Armys medical services were still using the cost -accounting system 
she had devised in the 1860s.  
I believe that the evidence of her letters supports continued respect for Nightingales 
brilliance and creativity.  When counseling a village schoolmaster to encourage children to use 
their faculties of observation, she sounds like a modern educator. Her insistence on classifying 
the problems of the needy in  order to devise appropriate treatments is similar to the approach 260 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 of modern social workers. In sum, although Nightingale may not have achieved all of her goals 
during the Crimean War, her breadth of vision and ability to realize ambitious projects have 
earned her an eminent place among the ranks of social pioneers.  
73. The passage is primarily concerned with evaluating  
(A) the importance of Florence Nightingales innovations in the field of nursing  
(B) contrasting approaches to the writing of historical bi ography  
(C) contradictory accounts of Florence Nightingales historical significance  
(D) the quality of health care in nineteenth -century England  
(E) the effect of the Crimean War on developments in the field of health care  
74. According to the passage, the editors of Nightingales letters credit her with 
contributing to which of the following?  
(A) Improving of the survival rate for soldiers in British Army hospitals during 
the Crimean War  
(B) The development of a nurses training curriculum that was far in advance of 
its day  
(C) The increase in the number of women doctors practicing in British Army 
hospitals  
(D) Establishment of the first facili ty for training nurses at a major British 
university  
(E) The creation of an organization for monitoring the peacetime living 
conditions of British soldiers  
75. The passage suggests which of the following about Nightingales relationship 
with the British public of her day?  
(A) She was highly respected, he r projects receiving popular and governmental 
support.  
(B) She encountered resistance both from the army establishment and the general 
public.  
(C) She was supported by the working classes and opposed by the wealthier 
classes.  
(D) She was supported by the m ilitary establishment but had to fight the 
governmental bureaucracy.  
(E) After initially being received with enthusiasm, she was quickly forgotten.  
76. The passage suggests which of the following about sanitary conditions in Britain 
after the Crimean War?  
(A) While not ideal, they were superior to those in other parts o f the world.  
(B) Compared with conditions before the war, they had deteriorated.  
(C) They were more advanced in rural areas than in the urban centers.  
(D) They were worse in military camps than in the neighboring civilian 
populations.   GMAT  261 
 (E) They were unif ormly crude and unsatisfactory throughout England.  
77. Which of the following statements regarding the differing interpretations of 
Nightingales importance would the author most likely agree?  
(A) Summers misunderstood both the importance of Nightingales achievements 
during the Crimean War and her subsequent influence on British policy.  
(B) The editors of Nightingales letters made some valid points about her 
practical achievements, but they still exaggerated her influence on 
subsequent generations.  
(C) Al though Summers account of Nightingales role in the Crimean War may be 
accurate, she ignored evidence of Nightingales subsequent achievement that 
suggests that her reputation as an eminent social reformer is well deserved.  
(D) The editors of Nightingale s letters mistakenly propagated the outdated 
idealization of Nightingale that only impedes attempts to arrive at a balance 
assessment of her true role.  
(E) The evidence of Nightingales letters supports Summers conclusions both 
about Nightingales activities and about her influence.  
78. Which of the following is an assumption underlying the authors assessment of 
Nightingales creativity?  
(A) Educati onal philosophy in Nightingales day did not normally emphasize 
developing childrens ability to observe.  
(B) Nightingale was the first to notice the poor living conditions in British 
military barracks in peacetime.  
(C) No educator before Nightingale had t hought to enlist the help of village 
schoolmasters in introducing new teaching techniques.  
(D) Until Nightingale began her work, there was no concept of organized help for 
the needy in nineteenth -century Britain.  
(E) The British Armys medical services had no cost -accounting system until 
Nightingale devised one in the 1860s.  
79. In the last paragraph, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) summarizing the arguments about Nightingale presented in the first two 
paragraphs  
(B) refuting the view of Nightingales career presented in the preceding paragraph  
(C) analyzing the weaknesses of the evidence presented elsewhere in the passage  
(D) citing evidence to support a view of Nightingales career  
(E) correctin g a factual error occurring in one of the works under review