In the seventeenth -century Florentine textile industry, women were employed primarily in 
low-paying, low -skill jobs. To explain this segregation of labor by gender, ec onomists have 
relied on the useful theory of human capital . According to this theory, investment in human 
capital the acquisition of difficult job -related skills generally benefits individuals by making 
them eligible to engage in w ell-paid occupations. Womens role as child bearers, however, 
results in interruptions in their participation in the job market (as compared with  mens) and 
thus reduces their opportunities to acquire training for highly skil led work. In addition, the 
human capital theory explains why there was a high concentration of women workers in certain 
low-skill jobs, such as weaving, but not in others, such as combing or carding, by positing that 
because of their primary responsibility  in child rearing women took occupations that could be 
carried out in the home.  
There were, however, differences in pay scales that cannot be explained by the human 
capital theory. For example, male construction workers were paid significantly higher wage than 
female taffeta weavers. The wage difference between these two low -skill occupations stems 
from the segregation of labor by gender: because a limited number of occupations were open 
to women, there was a large supply of workers in their fields, and thi s overcrowding resulted 
in women receiving lower wages and men receiving higher wages.  
265. The passage suggests that combing and carding differ from weaving in that 
combing and carding are  
(A) low -skill jobs performed by primarily by women employees  
(B) low-skill jobs that were not performed in the home  
(C) low -skill jobs performed by both male and female employees  
(D) high -skill jobs performed outside the home  
(E) high -skill jobs performed by both male and female employees  
266. Which of the following , if true, would most weaken the explanation provided by 
the human capital theory for womens concentration in certain occupations in 284 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 seventeenth -century Florence?  
(A) Women were unlikely to work outside the home even in occupations whose 
house were flexib le enough to allow women to accommodate domestic tasks 
as well as paid labor.  
(B) Parents were less likely to teach occupational skills to their daughters than 
they were to their sons.  
(C) Womens participation in the Florentine paid labor force grew stead ily 
throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.  
(D) The vast majority of female weavers in the Florentine wool industry had 
children.  
(E) Few women worked as weavers in the Florentine silk industry, which was 
devoted to making cloths that requir ed a high degree of skill to produce.  
267. The author of the passage would be most likely to describe the explanation 
provided by the human capital theory for the high concentration of women in 
certain occupations in the seventeenth -century Florence textil e industry as  
(A) well founded though incomplete  
(B) difficult to articulate  
(C) plausible but poorly substantiated  
(D) seriously flawed  
(E) contrary to recent research