At the end of the nineteenth century, a rising interest in Native American customs and an 
increasing desire to understand Native American culture prompted ethnologists to begin 
recording the life stories of Native American. Ethnologists had a distinct reason for wanting to 
hear the stories: they were after linguistic or anthropological data that would supplement their 
own field observations, and they believe d that the personal stories, even of a single individual, 
could increase their understanding of the cultures that they had been observing from without . 
In addition many ethnologists at the turn of the century believed that Native American manners 
and customs were rapidly disappearing, and that it was important to preserve for posterity as 
much information as could be adequately recorded before th e cultures disappeared forever.  
There were, however, arguments against this method as a way of acquiring accurate and 
complete information. Franz Boas, for example, described autobiographies as being of limited 
value, and useful chiefly for the study of t he perversion of truth by memory, while Paul Radin 
contended that investigators rarely spent enough time with the tribes they were observing, and 
inevitably derived results too tinged by the investigators own emotional tone to be reliable.  
Even more impo rtantly, as these life stories moved from the traditional oral mode to 
recorded written form, much was inevitably lost. Editors often decided what elements were  GMAT  63 
 significant to the field research  on a given tribe. Native Ameri cans recognized that the essence 
of their lives could not be communicated in English and that events that they thought significant 
were often deemed unimportant by their interviewers. Indeed, the very act of telling their 
stories could force Native America n narrators to distort their cultures, as taboos had to be 
broken to speak the names of dead relatives crucial to their family stories.  
Despite all of this, autobiography remains a useful tool for ethnological research: such 
personal reminiscences and impr essions, incomplete as they may be, are likely to throw more 
light on the working of the mind and emotions than any amount of speculation from an 
ethnologist or ethnological theorist from another culture.  
1. Which of the following best describes the organi zation of the passage?  
(A) The historical backgrounds of two currently used research methods are 
chronicled.  
(B) The validity of the data collected by using two different research methods is 
compared.  
(C) The usefulness of a research method is questioned a nd then a new method is 
proposed.  
(D) The use of a research method is described and the limitations of the results 
obtained are discussed.  
(E) A research method is evaluated and the changes necessary for its adaptation to 
other subject areas are discuss ed. 
2. Which of the following is most similar to the actions of nineteenth -century 
ethnologists in their editing of the life stories of Native Americans?  
(A) A witness in a jury trial invokes the Fifth Amendment in order to avoid 
relating personally incrim inating evidence.  
(B) A stockbroker refuses to divulge the source of her information on the possible 
future increase in a stocks value.  
(C) A sports announcer describes the action in a team sport with which he is 
unfamiliar.  
(D) A chef purposely excludes the special ingredient from the recipe of his 
prizewinning dessert.  
(E) A politician fails to mention in a campaign speech the similarities in the 
positions held by her opponent for political office and by herself.  
3. According to the passage, collectin g life stories can be a useful methodology 
because  
(A) life stories provide deeper insights into a culture than the hypothesizing of 
academics who are not members of that culture  
(B) life stories can be collected easily and they are not subject to invalid 
interpretations  
(C) ethnologists have a limited number of research methods from which to choose  
(D) life stories make it easy to distinguish between the important and unimportant 64 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 features of a culture  
(E) the collection of life stories does not require a culturally knowledgeable 
investigator  
4. Information in the passage suggests that which of the following may be a possible 
way to eliminate bias in the editing of life stories?  
(A) Basing all infere nces made about the culture on an ethnological theory  
(B) Eliminating all of the emotion -laden information reported by the informant  
(C) Translating the informants words into the researchers language  
(D) Reducing the number of questions and carefully spe cifying the content of the 
questions that the investigator can ask the informant  
(E) Reporting all of the information that the informant provides regardless of the 
investigators personal opinion about its intrinsic value  
5. The primary purpose of the passage as a whole is to  
(A) question an explanation  
(B) correct a misconception  
(C) critique  a methodology  
(D) discredit an idea  
(E) clarify an ambiguity  
6. It can be inferred from the passage that a characteristic of the ethnological 
research on Native Americans conducted during the nineteenth c entury was the 
use of which of the following?  
(A) Investigators familiar with the culture under study  
(B) A language other than the informants for recording life stories  
(C) Life stories as the e thnologists primary source of information  
(D) Complete transcriptions of informants descriptions of tribal beliefs  
(E) Stringent guidelines for the preservation of cultural data  
7. The passage mentions which of the following as a factor that can affect the 
accuracy of ethnologists transcriptions of life stories?  
(A) The informants social standing within the cultu re 
(B) The inclusiveness of the theory that provided the basis for the research  
(C) The length of time the researchers spent in the culture under study  
(D) The number of life stories collected by the researchers  
(E) The verifiability of the information provided by the research informants  
8. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to agree 
with which of the following statements about the usefulness of life stories as a 
source of ethnographic information?  
(A) They can be a source of information about how people in a culture view the  GMAT  65 
 world.  
(B) They are most useful as a source of linguistic information.  
(C) They require editing and interpretation before they can be useful.  
(D) They are most useful as a source of information a bout ancestry.  
(E) They provide incidental information rather than significant insights into a way 
of life.