Astrophysicists wre stling with the study of a new kind of star, the flat, two-dimensional  
configurations known as accretion disks have recently gained new insights  into the behavior of 
these stars. Accretion disks exist in a variety of situations where matters swirl around  a compact 
star such as a white dwarf star or a neutron star. Accretion disks are also suspected of playing a 
part in  more exotic situations, in which the central object is imagined to be a supermassive 
black hole, the ultimate form of collapsed matter, ra ther than a compact star. The modeling of 
accretion disks is still in its infancy, a situation analogous to the days when ordinary stars were 
modeled by using elementary scaling laws without benefit of knowledge of the nuclear 
processes that power the star s. Similarly, the basic physics of the power by which accretion 
disks radiate, thought to or iginate in a form of turbulent friction, is known only at the crudest 
level. 
Accretion disks were first defined in the context of Cataclysmic variables. In these sy stems, 
matter from the outer layers of an ordinary star is attracted by the gravitational influence of a 
nearby orbiting white dwarf star, the matter lost from the ordinary star cannot strike the surface 
of the tiny white dwarf directly but settles into an  orbit around the star. The viscosity in the disk 
thus formed causes heating, radiation, and a slow spiraling of disk matter onto the surface of 
the white dwarf.  
The rapid advances made in x -ray astronomy in the past decade have identified a second 
type of  system in which accretion disks occur. In such a system, an accretion disk whirls about 
a neutron star rather than a white  dwarf. The inner reaches of the accretion disk extend deeply 
into the gravitational potential of the neutron star where very rapid m otion is the rule. The 
energy released by friction and the actual raining of the material from the disk onto the surface 
of the neutron star is so great that radiation is given off in a powerful flood of x -rays. And in at 
least one case, x -ray astronomers believe that the object in the center of an accretion disk is a 
black hole, suggesting that a third system may exist.  
It had been assumed that portions of accretion disks would be unstable and that, as a 
result, clumping of their matter into rings would oc cur. There is no evidence from observation, 
however, that accretion disks do, in fact, suffer from these instabilities. In recent work, 
Abramowicz has shown that added gravitational effects due to general relativity may alter the 
expected Newtonian gravita tional relationships in such a way that the disk remains stable, 
indicating that it is possible that these predicted instabilities do not occur.  
Further progress toward understanding accretion disks will involve defining and proposing 
solutions to restrict ed problems just as was done in this case and was done and continues to be 
done for ordinary stars. Abramowicz  work is a valuable example of the care that must be taken 
before reac hing conclusions regarding accretion disks.   GMAT  213 
 1. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) comparing Abramowicz  work to the work of earlier astrophysicists  
(B) providing information about accretion disks and discussing significant new 
work  
(C) defining the conditions under which accretion disks can be observed  
(D) exploring the question of whether a black hole can ever be the central object 
of an accretion disk  
(E) describing the phenomenon of accretion disks and reviewing several 
conflicting theories of their origins  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that predictions of the instability of accretion 
disks were based on which of the following?  
(A) A calcu lation of the probable effects of standard Newtonian gravitational 
relationships  
(B) A calculation of the probable relationship between general relativity and 
standard Newtonian gravitational relationships  
(C) A calculation of the energy released by fricti on within a compact star  
(D) Observation of the x -rays radiated by compact stars  
(E) Observation of the clumping of accretion disk matter into rings around 
compact stars  
3. The author s attitude toward Abramowicz  work can best be described as one of  
(A) uncertain approval  
(B) unqualified respect  
(C) mild interest  
(D) careful dismi ssal 
(E) hostile skepticism  
4. The passage suggests which of the following about current scientific knowledge 
of the nuclear processes of ordinary stars?  
(A) Its pattern of development has been analogous to that of developments in 
x-ray astronomy.  
(B) I ts role in the explanation of turbulent friction has been significant.  
(C) It has contributed to a more accurate modeling of ordinary stars.  
(D) It lags behind knowledge of scaling laws.  
(E) It explains the behavior of accretion disks as well as that of  ordinary stars.  
5. The passage suggests that Abramowicz  work was motivated by which of the 
following assumptions?  
(A) The quantity of energy released by accretion disks can be as large as it is only 
if the disks are stable.  
(B) Improved techniques in x -ray astronomy would reveal any instabilities 214 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 occurring in accretion disks.  
(C) The lack of observational evidence of instabilities in accretion disks suggests 
that predictions of their occurrence might be wrong.  
(D) Known methods of observing accretion disk  surrounding compact stars and 
black holes do not permit the observation of the matter in accretion disks.  
(E) The gravitational potential of compact stars does not vary from star to star.  
6. The passage implies which of the following about the progress  of knowledge in 
astrophysics?  
(A) Adherence to outdated theories has, in the past, limited the activities of 
astrophysicists and restricted progress.  
(B) Progress has, in the past, occurred only as a result of significant 
breakthroughs in basic physics an d chemistry.  
(C) Progress has, in the past, occurred as a result of a process of defining and 
solving restricted problems.  
(D) Given the recent acquisition of knowledge about the nuclear processes of 
stars, further progress is likely to be limited to the r efinement of what is 
already  known.  
(E) Conclusions in astrophysics have, in the past, been seriously flawed, thus 
limiting progress, although there have recently been signs of change.  
7. The passage suggests that, compared to the study of ordinary star s, the study of 
accretion disks is  
(A) derivative  
(B) more sophisticated  
(C) less clearly focused  
(D) at an earlier stage of development  
(E) more dependent on technological advances  
8. According to the passage, some accretion disks originated in  
(A) an increase in heat and radiation around an ordinary star  
(B) a powerful flood of x -rays emitted by a neutron star  
(C) a collision between two stars  
(D) the turbulent friction on the surface of a compact star  
(E) the accumulation of matter removed from an ordinary star  
9. It can be inferred from the passage that the significance of Abramowicz  work is 
that it  
(A) provides a means of measuring the gravitational potential of neutron stars  
(B) opens a new area for exploration in the field of x -ray astronomy  
(C) proves that scaling laws cannot be applied to accretion disks  
(D) proposes a new system of classification of stars   GMAT  215 
 (E) suggests a resolution of a discrepancy between a theoretical prediction and 
actual observation