During the Victorian period, women writers were measured against a social rather than a  
literary ideal. Hence, it was widely thought that novels by women should be modest, religious, 
sensitive, guileless, and chaste, like their authors. Many Victorian women writers took exception 
to this belief, however, resisting the imposition of nonliterar y restrictions on their work. 
Publishers soon discovered that the gentlest and most iddylike female novelists were 
tough -minded and relentless when their professional integrity  was at stake . Keenly aware of 
their artistic responsibilities, these women writers would not make concessions to secure 
commercial success.  
The Brontes, George Eliot, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, and their lesser -known 182 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 contemporaries repudiated, in their profe ssional lives, the courtesy that Victorian ladies might 
exact from Victorian gentlemen. Desiring rigorous and impartial criticism, most women writers 
did not wish reviewers to be kind to them if kindness meant overlooking their literary 
weaknesses or flatt ering them on their accomplishments simply because of their sex. They had 
expected derisive reviews; instead, they found themselves confronted with generous criticism, 
which they considered condescending. Elizabeth Barrett Browning labeled it the comparat ive 
respect which means... absolute scorn.  
For their part, Victorian critics  were virtually obsessed with finding the place of the woman 
writer so as to judge her appropriately. Many bluntly admitted that they thought Jane Eyre  a 
masterpiece if written by  a man, shocking or disgusting if written by a woman. Moreover, 
reactionary reviewers were quick to associate an independent heroine with carefully concealed 
revolutionary doctrine; several considered Jane Eyre  a radical feminist document, as indeed it 
was. To Charlotte Bronte, who had demanded dignity and independence without any 
revolutionary intent and who considered herself politically conservative, their criticism was an 
affront. Such criticism bunched all women writers together rather than treating th em as 
individual artists.  
Charlotte Bronte s experience served as a warning to other women writers about the 
prejudices that immediately associated them with feminists and others thought to be political 
radicals. Irritated, and anxious to detach themselves  from a group stereotype, many expressed 
relatively conservative views on the emancipation of women (except on the subject of women s 
education) and stressed their own domestic accomplishments. However, in identifying 
themselves with women who had chosen t he traditional career path of marriage and 
motherhood, these writers encountered still another threat to their creativity. Victorian prudery 
rendered virtually all experience that was uniquely feminine unprintable. No nineteenth -century 
woman dared to desc ribe childbirth, much less her sexual passion. Men could not write about 
their sexual experiences either, but they could write about sport, business, crime, and war all 
activities from which women were barred. Small wonder no woman produced a novel like War 
and Peace . What is amazing is the sheer volume of first -rate prose and poetry that Victorian 
women did write.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) refute the contention that no Victorian woman writer produced a novel like 
War and Peace  
(B) tra ce the historical relationship between radical feminist politics and the 
Victorian novels written by women  
(C) show how three Victorian women writers responded to criticism of their 
novels  
(D) resolve the apparent contradiction between Victorian women writ ers literary 
innovativeness and their rather conservative social views  
(E) describe the discrepancy between Victorian society s expectations of women 
writers and the expectations of the women writers themselves  
2. According to the passage, Victorian women writers would not make 
concessions  (line 13) to publishers primar ily because they felt that such  GMAT  183 
 concessions would  
(A) require them to limit descriptions of uniquely feminine experiences  
(B) compromise their artistic integrity  
(C) make them vulnerable to stereotyping by critics  
(D) provide no guarantee that their works would enjoy commercial success  
(E) go against  the traditions of English letters  
3. The passage suggests that Victorian criticism of works by women writers was  
(A) indulgent  
(B) perfunctory  
(C) resourceful  
(D) timely  
(E) apolitical  
4. The author of the passage quotes Elizabeth Barrett Browning (lines 28 -29) in 
order to demonstrate that Victorian women writers  
(A) possessed both talent and literary creativity  
(B) felt that their works were misunderstood  
(C) refused to make artistic concessions  
(D) feared derisive criticism  
(E) resented condescending criticism  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that Charlotte Bronte considered the criticisms 
leveled at Jane Eyre by reactionary reviewers an affront  (line 43) primarily 
because such criticism  
(A) exposed her carefully concealed revolutionary doctrine to public scrutiny  
(B) assessed the literary merit of the novel on the basis of its author s sex  
(C) assumed that her portrayal of an independent woman represented 
revolutionary ideas  
(D) labeled the novel shocking and disg usting without just cause  
(E) denied that the novel was a literary masterpiece  
6. Which of the following statements best describes the threat  mentioned in line 
57 of the passage?  
(A) Critics demanded to know the sex of the author before passing judgment on 
the literary qualit y of a novel.  
(B) Women writers were prevented from describing in print experiences about 
which they had special knowledge.  
(C) The reading public tended to prefer historical novels to novels describing 
contemporary London society.  
(D) Publishers were urgi ng Victorian women writers to publish under their own 
names rather than under pseudonyms.  184 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) Women writers  domestic responsibilities tended to take time away from their 
writing.  
7. The passage suggests that the attitude of Victorian women writers toward being 
grouped together by critics was most probably one of  
(A) relief  
(B) indifference  
(C) amusement  
(D) annoyance  
(E) ambivalence  
8. It can be inferred from the passage that a Victori an woman writer who did not 
consider herself a feminist would most probably have approved of women s 
(A) entering the noncombat military  
(B) entering the p ublishing business  
(C) entering a university  
(D) joining the stock exchange  
(E) joining a tennis club  
9. The passage suggests that the literary creativity of Victorian women writers could 
have been enhanced if  
(A) women had been allowed to write about a  broader range of subjects  
(B) novels of the period had been characterized by greater stylistic and structural 
ingenuity  
(C) a reserved and decorous style had been a more highly valued literary ideal  
(D) publishers had sponsored more new women novelists  
(E) critics had been kinder in reviewing the works of women novelists