A meteor stream  is composed of dust particles that have been ejected from a parent comet 
at a variety of velocities. These particles follow the same orbit as the parent comet, but due to 262 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 their differing velocities they slowly gain on  or fall behind the disintegrating comet until a 
shroud of dust surrounds the entire cometary orbit.  Astronomers have hypothesized that a 
meteor stream sh ould broaden with time as the dust particles individual orbits are perturbed by 
planetary gravitational fields. A recent computer -modeling experiment tested this hypothesis by 
tracking the influence of planetary gravitation over a projected 5,000 -year per iod on the 
positions of a group of hypothetical dust particles. In the model, the particles were randomly 
distributed throughout a computer simulation  of the orbit of an actual meteor stream, the 
Geminid. The researcher found, as expected, that the computer -model stream broadened with 
time. Conventional theories, however, predicted that the distribution of particles would be 
increasingly dense tow ard the center of a meteor stream. Surpri singly, the computer -model 
meteor stream gradually came to resemble a thick -walled, hollow pipe.  
Whenever the Earth passes through a meteor stream, a meteor shower  occurs. Moving at 
a little over 1,500,000 miles per day around its orbit, the Earth would take, on average, just 
over a day to cross the hollow, computer -model Geminid stream if the stream were 5,000 years 
old. Two brief periods of peak meteor activity during the shower would be o bserved, one as the 
Earth entered the thick -walled pipe and one as it exited.  There is no reason why the Earth 
should always pass through the streams exact center, so the time interval between the two 
bursts of activity would vary from one year to the n ext. 
Has the predicted twin -peaked activity been observed for the actual yearly Geminid meteor 
shower? The Geminid data between 1970 and 1979 show just such a bifurcation, a secondary 
burst of meteor activity being clearly visible at an average of 19 hours  (1,200,000 miles) after 
the first burst. The time intervals between the bursts suggest the actual Geminid stream is 
about 3,000 years old.  
80. The primary focus of the passage is on which of the following?  
(A) Comparing two scientific theories and contras ting the predictions that each 
would make concerning a natural phenomenon  
(B) Describing a new theoretical model and noting that it explains the nature of 
observations made of a particular natural phenomenon  
(C) Evaluating the results of a particular scien tific experiment and suggesting 
further areas for research  
(D) Explaining how two different natural phenomena are related and 
demonstrating a way to measure them  
(E) Analyzing recent data derived from observations of an actual phenomenon 
and constructing a model to explain the data  
81. According to the passage, which of the following is an accurate statement 
concerning meteor streams?  
(A) Meteor streams and com ets start out with similar orbits, but only those of 
meteor streams are perturbed by planetary gravitation.  
(B) Meteor streams grow as dust particles are attracted by the gravitational fields 
of comets.  
(C) Meteor streams are composed of dust particles der ived from comets.   GMAT  263 
 (D) Comets may be composed of several kinds of materials, while meteor streams 
consist only of large dust particles.  
(E) Once formed, meteor streams hasten the further disintegration of comets.  
82. The author states that the research described in the first paragraph was undertaken 
in order to  
(A) determine the age of an actual meteor stream  
(B) identify the various s tructural features of meteor streams  
(C) explore the nature of a particularly interesting meteor stream  
(D) test the hypothesis that meteor streams become broader as they age  
(E) show that a computer model could help in explaining actual astronomical da ta 
83. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following would most 
probably be observed during the Earths passage through a meteor stream if the 
conventional theories mentioned in line 18 were  correct?  
(A) Meteor activity would gradually in crease to a single, intense peak, and then 
gradually decline.  
(B) Meteor activity would be steady throughout the period of the meteor shower.  
(C) Meteor activity would rise to a peak at the beginning and at the end of the 
meteor shower.  
(D) Random bursts o f very high meteor activity would be interspersed with 
periods of very little activity.  
(E) In years in which the Earth passed through only the outer areas of a meteor 
stream, meteor activity would be absent.  
84. According to the passage, why do the dus t particles in a meteor stream eventually 
surround a comets original orbit?  
(A) They are ejected by the comet at differing velocities.  
(B) Their orbits are uncontrolled by planetary gravitational fields.  
(C) They become part of the meteor stream at differ ent times.  
(D) Their velocity slows over time.  
(E) Their ejection velocity is slower than that of the comet.  
85. The passage suggests that which of the following is a prediction concerning 
meteor streams that can be derived from both the conventional theories 
mentioned in line 18 and the new comput er-derived theory?  
(A) Dust particles in a meteor stream will usually be distributed evenly 
throughout any cross section of the steam.  
(B) The orbits of most meteor streams should cross the orbit of the Earth at some 
point and give rise to a meteor shower.  
(C) Over time the distribution of dust in a meteor stream will usually become 
denser at the outside edges of the stream than at the center.  264 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) Meteor showers caused by older meteor streams should be, on average, 
longer in duration than those caused by ve ry young meteor streams.  
(E) The individual dust particles in older meteor streams should be, on average, 
smaller than those that compose younger meteor streams.  
86. It can be inferred from the last paragraph of the passage that which of the 
following m ust be true of the Earth as it orbits the Sun?  
(A) Most meteor streams it encounters are more than 2,000 years old.  
(B) When passing through a meteor stream, it usually passes near to the streams 
center.  
(C) It crosses the Geminid meteor stream once every  year.  
(D) It usually takes over a day to cross the actual Geminid meteor stream.  
(E) It accounts f or most of the gravitational perturbation affecting the Geminid 
meteor stream.  
87. Which of the following is an assumption underlying the last sentence of the 
passage?  
(A) In each of the years between 1970 and 1979, the Earth took exac tly 19 hours 
to cross the Geminid meteor stream.  
(B) The comet associated with the Geminid meteor stream has totally 
disintegrated.  
(C) The Geminid meteor stream should continue to exist for at least 5,000 years.  
(D) The Geminid meteor stream has not broad ened as rapidly as the conventional 
theories would have predicted.  
(E) The computer -model Geminid meteor stream provides an accurate 
representation of the development of the actual Geminid stream.