Protein synthesis begins when the gene encoding a protein is activated. The genes 
sequence of nucleotides is transcribed into a molecule of messenger RNA (mRNA), which 
reproduces the information contained in that sequence. Transported outside the nucleus to the 
cytoplasm, the mRNA is translated into the protein it encodes by an organelle known as a 
ribosome, which strings together amino acids in the order specified by the sequence of 
elements in t he mRNA molecule. Since the amount of mRNA in a cell determines the amount of 
the corresponding protein, factors affecting the abundance of mRNAs play a major part in the 
normal functioning of a cell by appropriately regulating protein synthesis. For exam ple, an 
excess of certain proteins can cause cells to proliferate abnormally and become cancerous; a 
lack of the protein insulin results in diabetes.  
Biologists once assumed that the variable rates at which cells synthesize different mRNAs 
determine the q uantities of mRNAs and their corresponding proteins in a cell. However, recent 
investigations have shown that the concentrations of most mRNAs correlate best, not with their 
synthesis rate, but rather with the equally variable rates at which cells degrad e the different 
mRNAs in their cytoplasm. If a cell degrades both a rapidly and a slowly synthesized mRNA 
slowly, both mRNAs will accumulate to high levels.  
An important example of this phenomenon is the development of red blood cells from their 
unspecia lized parent cells in bone marrow . For red blood cells to accumulate sufficient 
concentrations of hemoglobin  (which transports oxygen) to carry out their main function, the 
cells parent cells must simultaneously pr oduce more of the constituent proteins of hemoglobin 
and less of most other proteins. To do this, the parent cells halt synthesis of non -hemoglobin 
mRNAs in the nucleus and rapidly degrade copies of the non -hemoglobin mRNAs remaining in 
the cytoplasm. Ha lting synthesis of mRNA alone would not affect the quantities of proteins 
synthesized by the mRNAs still existing in the cytoplasm. Biologists now believe that most cells 
can regulate protein production most efficiently by varying both mRNA synthesis and 
degradation, as developing red cells do, rather than by just varying one or the other.  
1. The passage is primarily concerned with discussing the  
(A) influence of mRNA concentrations on the development of red blood cells  
(B) role of the synthesis and degrad ation of mRNA in cell functioning  
(C) mechanism by which genes are transcribed into mRNA  
(D) differences in mRNA concentrations in cell nuclei and in the cytoplasm  
(E) way in which mRNA synthesis contributes to the onset of diabetes  
2. The passage suggests that a biologist who held the view described in the first 
sentence of the second paragraph would most probably also have believed which 
of the following?  
(A) T he rate of degradation of specific mRNAs has little effect on protein 
concentrations.  
(B) The rate of degradation of specific mRNAs should be studied intensively.   GMAT  97 
 (C) The rates of synthesis and degradation for any given mRNA are normally 
equal.  
(D) Diffe rent mRNAs undergo degradation at widely varying rates.  
(E) Most mRNAs degrade very rapidly.  
3. Which of the following best describes the relationship between the second and 
third paragraphs of the passage?  
(A) The second paragraph presents arguments in support of a new theory and the 
third paragraph prese nts arguments against that same theory.  
(B) The second paragraph describes a traditional view and the third paragraph 
describes the view that has replaced it on the basis of recent investigations.  
(C) The third paragraph describes a specific case of a phen omenon that is 
described generally in the second paragraph.  
(D) The third paragraph describes an investigation that was undertaken to resolve 
problems raised by phenomena described in the second paragraph.  
(E) Both paragraphs describe in detail specific examples of the phenomenon that 
is introduced in the first paragraph.  
4. The accumulation of concentrations of hemoglobin in red blood cells is 
mentioned in the passage as an example of which of the follo wing?  
(A) The effectiveness of simultaneous variation of the rates of synthesis and 
degradation of mRNA  
(B) The role of the ribosome in enabling a parent cell to develop properly into a 
more specialized form  
(C) The importance of activating the genes for p articular proteins at the correct 
moment  
(D) The abnormal proliferation of a protein that threatens to make the cell 
cancerous  
(E) The kind of evidence that biologists relied on for support of a view of mRNA 
synthesis that is now considered obsolete  
5. To begin to control a disease caused by a protein deficiency, the passage suggests 
that a promising experimental treatment wou ld be to administer a drug that would 
reduce  
(A) only the degradation rate for the mRNA of the protein involved  
(B) only the synthesis rate for the mRNA of the protein involved  
(C) both the synthesis and degradation rates for the mRNA of the protein 
involv ed 
(D) the incidence of errors in the transcription of mRNAs from genetic 
nucleotide sequences  
(E) the rate of activity of ribosomes in the cytoplasm of most cells  
6. According to the passage, which of the following best describes the current view 98 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 on the relationship between the synthesis and the degradation of mRNA in 
regulating protein synthes is? 
(A) Biologists have recently become convinced that the ribosome controls the 
rates of synthesis and degradation of mRNA.  
(B) There is no consensus among biologists as to the significance of mRNA 
degradation in regulating protein synthesis.  
(C) The conc ept of mRNA degradation is so new that most biologists still believe 
that the vital role in protein regulation belongs to mRNA synthesis.  
(D) Degradation of mRNA is now considered to be the key process and mRNA 
synthesis is no longer believed to play a sig nificant role.  
(E) Degradation of mRNA is now considered to be as important as mRNA 
synthesis has been, and still is, believed to be.  
7. According to the passage, which of the following can happen when protein 
synthesis is not appropriately regulated?  
(A) Diabetes can result from errors that occur when the ribosomes translate 
mRNA into protein.  
(B) Cancer can result from an excess of certain proteins and diabetes can result 
from an insulin deficiency.  
(C) A deficiency of red blood cells can occur if bone  marrow cells produce too 
much hemoglobin.  
(D) Cancer can be caused by excessively rapid degradation of certain amino acids 
in the cytoplasm of cells.  
(E) Excessive synthesis of one protein can trigger increased degradation of 
mRNAs for other proteins and create severe protein imbalances.  
8. The passage suggests that a biologist who detected high levels of two proteins in 
a certain type of cell woul d be likely to consider which of the following as a 
possible explanation?  
(A) The rate of mRNA degradation for one of the proteins increases as this type 
of cell develops a more specialized function.  
(B) The two proteins are most likely constituents of a c omplex substance 
supporting the cells specialized function.  
(C) The cells are likely to proliferate abnormally and possibly become cancerous 
due to the levels of these proteins.  
(D) The mRNAs for both proteins are being degraded at a low rate in that typ e of 
cell. 
(E) The mRNAs for the two proteins are being synthesized at identical rates in 
that type of cell.