The energy cont ained in rock within the earths crust represents a nearly unlimited energy 
source, but until recently commercial retrieval has been limited to underground hot water 
and/or steam recovery systems. These systems have been developed in areas of recent 
volcan ic activity, where high rates of heat flow cause visible eruption of water in the form of  
geysers and hot springs. In other areas, however, hot rock also exists near the surface but there 
is insufficient water present to produce eruptive phenomena. Thus a potential hot dry rock 
(HDR) reservoir exists whenever the amount of spontaneousl y produced geothermal fluid has 
been judged inadequate for existing commercial systems.  
As a result of recent energy crisis, new concepts for creating HDR recovery 
systems which involve drilling holes and connecting them to artificial reservoirs placed dee p 
within the crust are being developed. In all attempts to retrieve energy from HDRs, artificial 
stimulation will be required to create either sufficient permeability or bounded flow paths to 
facilitate the removal of heat by circulation of a fluid over t he surface of the rock.  
The HDR resource base is generally defined to included crustal rock that is hotter than 
150, is at depths less than ten kilometers, and can be drilled with presently available 
equipment. Although wells deeper than ten kilometers ar e technically feasible, prevailing 
economic factors will obviously determine the commercial feasibility of wells at such depths. 
Rock temperatures as low as 100  may be useful for space heating ; however, for producing 
electricity, temperatures greater than 200  are desirable.  
The geothermal gradient, which specifically determines the depth of dril ling required to 
reach a desired temperature, is a major factor in the recoverability of geothermal resources. 
Temperature gradient maps generated from oil and gas well temperature -depth records kept by 
the American Association of Petroleum Geologists sugg est that tappable high -temperature 
gradients are distributed all across the United States. (There are many areas, however, for 
which no temperature gradient records exist.)  
Indications are that the HDR resource base is very large. If an average geothermal 
temperature gradient of 22  per kilometer of depth is used, a staggering 13,000,000 294 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 quadrillion B.T.U.s of total energy are calculated to be contained in crustal rock to a 
ten-kilometer depth in the United States. If we conservatively estimate that only a bout 0.2 
percent is recoverable, we find a total of all the coal remaining in the United States. The 
remaining problem is to balance the economics of deeper, hotter, more costly wells and 
shallower, cooler, less expensive wells against the value of the fin al product, electricity and/or 
heat. 
21. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) alert readers to the existence of HDRs as an available energy source  
(B) document the challengers that have been surmounted in the effort to recover 
energy from HDRs  
(C) warn the users of coal and oil that HDRs are not an economically feasible 
alternative  
(D) encourage the use of new techniques for the recovery of energy from 
underground hot water and steam  
(E) urge consumers to demand quicker development of HDR reso urces for the 
production of energy  
22. The passage would be most likely to appear in a  
(A) petrological research report focused on the history of temperature -depth 
records in the United States  
(B) congressional report urging the conservation of oil and nat ural gas reserves in 
the United States  
(C) technical journal article concerned with the recoverability of newly identified 
energy sources  
(D) consumer report describing the extent and accessibility of remaining coal 
resources  
(E) pamphlet designed to introduce homeowners to the advantages of HDR 
space -heating systems  
23. According the passage, an average geothermal gradient of 22  per kilometer of 
depth can be used to  
(A) balance the economics of HDR energy retrieval agains t that of underground 
hot water or steam recovery systems  
(B) determine the amount of energy that will used for space heating in the United 
States  
(C) provide comparisons between hot water and HDR energy sources in United 
States  
(D) revise the estimates on  the extent of remaining coal resources in the United 
States  
(E) estimate the total HDR resource base in the United States  
24. It can be inferred from the passage  that the availability of temperature -depth  GRE  295 
 records for any specific area in the United States depends primarily on the  
(A) possibility that HDR s may be found in that area  
(B) existence of previous attempts to obtain oil or gas in that area  
(C) history of successful hot water or steam recovery efforts in that area  
(D) failure of inhabitants to conserve oil gas reserves in that area  
(E) use of coal as  a substitute for oil or gas in that area  
25. According to the passage, in all HDR recovery systems fluid will be necessary in 
order to allow  
(A) sufficient permeability  
(B) artificial stimulation  
(C) drilling of holes  
(D) construction of reservoirs  
(E) transfer of heat  
26. According to the passage, if the average geothermal gradient in an area is 22  
per kilometer of depth, which of the following can be reliably predicted?  
I. The temperature at the base of a 10 -kilometer well will be sufficient for the 
production of electricity.  
II. Drilling of wells deeper  than 10 kilometers will be economically feasible.  
III. Insufficient water is present to produce eruptive phenomena.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
27. Which of the following  would be the most appropriate title for the passage?  
(A) Energy from Water Sources: The Feasibility of Commercial Systems  
(B) Geothermal Energy Retrieval: V olcanic Activity and Hot Dry Rocks  
(C) Energy Underground: Geothermal Sour ces Give Way to Fossil Fuels  
(D) Tappable Energy for America s Future: Hot Dry Rocks  
(E) High Geothermal Gradients in the United States: Myth or Reality?