While there is no blueprint  for transforming a largely government -controlled economy into 
a free one, the exp erience of the United Kingdom since 1979 clearly shows one approach that 
works: privatization, in which state -owned industries are sold to private companies. By 1979, 
the total borrowings and losses of state -owned industries were running at about £3 billio n a 
year. By selling many of these industries, the government has decreased these borrowings and 
losses, gained over £ 34 billion from the sales, and now receives tax revenues from the newly 
privatized companies. Along with a dramatically improved overall e conomy, the government has 
been able to repay 12.5 percent of the net national debt over a two -year period.  
In fact, privatization has not only rescued individual industries and a whole economy 
headed for disaster, but has also raised the level of performa nce in every area. At British 
Airways and British Gas, for example, productivity per employee has risen by 20 percent. At 
Associated British Ports, labor disruptions common in the 1970s and early 1980s have now 
virtually disappeared. At British Telecom, there is no longer a waiting list as there always was 
before privatization to have a telephone installed.  
Part of this improved productivity has come about  because the employees of privatized 
industries were given the opp ortunity to buy shares in their own companies. They responded 
enthusiastically to the offer of shares; at British Aerospace, 89 percent of the eligible work force 
bought shares; at Associated British Ports, 90 percent; and at British Telecom, 92 percent. 
When people have a personal stake in something, they think about it, care about it, work to 
make it prosper. At the National Freight Consortium, the new employee -owners grew so 
concerned about their companys profits that during wage negotiations they actua lly pressed 
their union to lower its wage demands.  
Some economists have suggested that giving away free shares would provide a needed 
acceleration of the privatization process. Yet they miss Thomas Paines point that what we 
obtain too cheap we esteem too  lightly. In order for the far -ranging benefits of individual 
ownership to be achieved by owners, companies, and countries, employees and other 
individuals must make their own decisions to buy, and they must commit some of their own 
resources to the choic e. 
1. According to the passage, all of the following were benefits of privatizing 132 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 state-owned industries in the United Kingdom EXCEPT:  
(A) Privatized industries paid taxes to the government.  
(B) The government gained revenue from selling state -owned indust ries. 
(C) The government repaid some of its national debt.  
(D) Profits from industries that were still state -owned increased.  
(E) Total borrowings and losses of state -owned industries decreased.  
2. According to the passage, which of the following resulted in increased 
productivity in companies that have been privatized?  
(A) A large number of employees chose to purchase shares  in their companies.  
(B) Free shares were widely distributed to individual shareholders.  
(C) The government ceased to regulate major industries.  
(D) Unions conducted wage negotiations for employees.  
(E) Employee -owners agreed to have their wages lowered . 
3. It can be inferred from the passage that the author considers labor disruptions to 
be 
(A) an inevitable problem in a weak national economy  
(B) a positive sign of employee concern about a company  
(C) a predictor of employee reactions to a companys off er to sell shares to them  
(D) a phenomenon found more often in state -owned industries than in private 
companies  
(E) a deterrence to high performance levels in an industry  
4. The passage supports which of the following statements about employees buying 
shares in their own companies?  
(A) At three different companies, approximately nine out of ten of the workers 
were eligible to buy shares in their companies.  
(B) Approximately 90% of the eligible workers at three different companies 
chose o buy shares in their companies.  
(C) The opportunity to buy shares was discouraged by at least some labor unions.  
(D) Companies t hat demonstrated the highest productivity were the first to allow 
their employees the opportunity to buy shares.  
(E) Eligibility to buy shares was contingent on employees agreeing to increased 
work loads.  
5. Which of the following statements is most consistent with the principle described 
in lines 30 -32? 
(A) A democratic government that decides it is inappropria te to own a particular 
industry has in no way abdicated its responsibilities as guardian of the public 
interest.  
(B) The ideal way for a government to protect employee interests is to force  GMAT  133 
 companies to maintain their share of a competitive market without 
government subsidies.  
(C) The failure to harness the power of self -interest is an important reason that 
state-owned industries perform poorly.  
(D) Governments that want to implement privatization programs must try to 
eliminate all resistance to the free -market system.  
(E) The individual shareholder will reap only a minute share of the gains from 
whatever sacrifices he or she makes to achieve these gains.  
6. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about the privatization 
process in the Uni ted Kingdom?  
(A) It depends to a potentially dangerous degree on individual ownership of 
shares.  
(B) It conforms in its most general outlines to Thomas Pa ines prescription for 
business ownership.  
(C) It was originally conceived to include some giving away of free shares.  
(D) It has been successful, even though privatization has failed in other countries.  
(E) It is taking place more slowly than some economists suggest is necessary.  
7. The quotation in line 39  is most probably used to  
(A) counter a position that the author of the passage believes is incorrect  
(B) state a soluti on to a problem described in the previous sentence  
(C) show how opponents of the viewpoint of the author of the passage have 
supported their arguments  
(D) point out a paradox contained in a controversial viewpoint  
(E) present a historical maxim to chall enge the principle introduced in the third 
paragraph