The fossil remains of the first flying vertebrates, the pterosaurs, have intrigued 
paleont ologists for more than two centuries. How such large creatures, which weighed in some 
cases as much as a piloted hang-glider  and had wingspans from 8 to 12 meters, solved the 
problems of powered flight, and exactly what these creat ures were reptiles or birds are 
among the questions scientists have puzzled over.  
Perhaps the least controversial assertion about the pterosaurs is that they were reptiles.  GMAT  9 
 Their skulls, pelvises, and hind feet are reptilian. The anatomy of their wings sug gests that they 
did not evolve into the class of birds. In pterosaurs a greatly elongated fourth finger of each 
forelimb supported a wing -like membrane. The other fingers were short and reptilian, with 
sharp claws. In birds the second finger is the princip al strut of the wing, which consists 
primarily of feathers. If the pterosaurs walked on all fours, the three short fingers may have 
been employed for grasping. When a pterosaur walked or remained stationary, the fourth finger, 
and with it the wing, could o nly turn upward in an extended inverted V -shape along each side of 
the animals body.  
The pterosaurs resembled both birds and bats in their overall structure and proportions. 
This is not surprising because the design of any flying vertebrate is subject to aerodynamic 
constraints. Both the pterosaurs and the birds have hollow bones, a feature that represents a 
savings in weight. In the birds, however, these bones are reinforced more massively by internal 
struts.  
Although scales typically cover reptiles, the pterosaurs probably had hairy coats. T. H. 
Huxley reasoned that flying vertebrates must have been warm -blooded because flying implies a 
high rate of metabolism, which in turn implies a high internal temperature. Huxley speculated 
that a coat of hair would insulate against loss of body heat and might streamline the body to 
reduce drag in flight. The recent discovery of a pterosaur specimen covered in long, dense, and 
relatively thick hairlike fossil material was the first clear evidence that his reasoning wa s correct.  
Efforts to explain how the pterosaurs became airborne have led to suggestions that they 
launched themselves by jumping from cliffs, by dropping from trees , or even by rising into light 
winds from the crests of waves. Each hypothesis has its diff iculties. The first wrongly assumes 
that the pterosaurs hind feet resembled a bats and could serve as hooks by which the animal 
could hang in preparation for flight. The second hypothesis seems unlikely because large 
pterosaurs could not have landed in t rees without damaging their wings. The third calls for high 
waves to channel updrafts. The wind that made such waves however, might have been too 
strong for the pterosaurs to control their flight once airborne.  
1. It can be inferred from the passage that s cientists now generally agree that the  
(A) enormous wingspan of the pterosaurs enabled them to fly great distances  
(B) structure of the skeleton of the pterosaurs suggests a close evolutionary 
relationship to bats  
(C) fossil remains of the pterosaurs revea l how they solved the problem of 
powered flight  
(D) pterosaurs were reptiles  
(E) pterosaurs walked on all fours  
2. The author views the idea that the pterosaurs became airborne by rising into light 
winds created by waves as  
(A) revolutionary  
(B) unlikely  
(C) unassailable  
(D) probable  10 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) outdated  
3. According to the passage,  the skeleton of a pterosaur can be distinguished from 
that of a bird by the  
(A) size of its wingspan  
(B) presence of hollow spaces in its bones  
(C) anatomic origin of its wing strut  
(D) presence of hooklike projections on its hind feet  
(E) location of the shoulder joint joining the wing to its body  
4. The ideas attributed to T. H. Huxley in the passage suggest that he would most 
likely agree with which of the following statements?  
(A) An animals brain size has little bearing on its ability to master co mplex 
behaviors.  
(B) An animals appearance is often influenced by environmental requirements 
and physical capabilities.  
(C) Animals within a given family group are unlikely to change their appearance 
dramatically over a period of time.  
(D) The origin of f light in vertebrates was an accidental development rather than 
the outcome of specialization or adaptation.  
(E) The pterosaurs should be classified as birds, not reptiles.  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following is characteris tic of 
the pterosaurs?  
(A) They were unable to fold their wings when not in use.  
(B) They hung upside down from branches as bats do before flight.  
(C) They flew in order to capture prey.  
(D) They were an early stage in the evolution of the birds.  
(E) Th ey lived primarily in a forest -like habitat.  
6. Which of the following best describes the organization of the last paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) New evidence is introduced to support a traditional point of view.  
(B) Three explanations for a phenomenon are presented, and each is disputed by 
means of specific information.  
(C) Three hypotheses are outlined, and evidence supporting each is given.  
(D) Recent discoveries are described, and their implications for future study are 
projected . 
(E) A summary of the material in the preceding paragraphs is presented, and 
conclusions are drawn.  
7. It can be inferred from the passage that some scientists believe that pterosaurs  
(A) lived near large bodies of water   GMAT  11 
 (B) had sharp teeth for tearing food 
(C) were attacked and eaten by larger reptiles  
(D) had longer tails than many birds  
(E) consumed twice their weight daily to maintain their body temperature