Japanese firms have achieved the highest levels of manufacturing efficiency in the world 
automobile industry. Some observers of Jap an have assumed that Japanese firms use the same 
manufacturing equipment and techniques as United States firms but have benefited from the 
unique characteristics of Japanese employees and the Japanese culture. However, if this were 
true, then one would exp ect Japanese auto plants in the United States to perform no better 
than factories run by United States companies. This is not the case; Japanese -run automobile 
plants located in the United States and staffed by local workers have demonstrated higher 
levels  of productivity when compared with factories owned by United States companies.  
Other observers link high Japanese productivity to higher levels of capital investment per 
worker. But a historical perspective leads to a different conclusion. When the two to p Japanese 
automobile makers matched and then doubled United States productivity  levels in the 
mid-sixties, capital investment per employee was comparable to that of United States firms. 
Furthermore, by the late seventies, the amount of fixed assets requir ed to produce one vehicle 
was roughly equivalent in Japan and in the United States.  
Since capital investment was not higher in Japan, it had to be other factors that led to 
higher productivity. A more fruitful explanation may lie with Japanese production t echniques.  GMAT  105 
 Japanese automobile producers did not simply implement conventional processes more 
effectively: they made critical changes in United States procedures. For instance, the 
mass-production philosophy of United States automakers encouraged the produ ction of huge 
lots of cars in order to utilize fully expensive, component -specific equipment and to occupy fully 
workers who have been trained to execute one operation efficiently. Japanese automakers 
chose to make small -lot production feasible by introduc ing several departures from United 
States practices, including the use of flexible equipment that could be altered easily to do 
several different production tasks and the training of workers in multiple jobs. Automakers 
could schedule the production of dif ferent components or models on single machines, thereby 
eliminating the need to store the buffer stocks of extra components that result when specialized 
equipment and workers are kept constantly active.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) prese nt the major steps of a process  
(B) clarify an ambiguity  
(C) chronicle a dispute  
(D) correct misconceptions  
(E) defend an accepted approach  
2. The author suggests that if the observers of Japan mentioned in line 3  were 
correct, which of the following would be the case?  
(A) The equipment used in Japanese automobile plants would be d ifferent from 
the equipment used in United States plants.  
(B) Japanese workers would be trained to do several different production jobs.  
(C) Culture would not have an influence on the productivity levels of workers.  
(D) The workers in Japanese -run plants w ould have higher productivity levels 
regardless of where they were located.  
(E) The production levels of Japanese -run plants located in the United States 
would be equal to those of plants run by United States companies.  
3. Which of the following statements concerning the productivity levels of 
automakers can be inferred from t he passage?  
(A) Prior to the 1960s, the productivity levels of the top Japanese automakers 
were exceeded by those of United States automakers.  
(B) The culture of a country has a large effect on the productivity levels of its 
automakers.  
(C) During the lat e 1970s and early 1980s, productivity levels were comparable 
in Japan and the United States.  
(D) The greater the number of cars that are produced in a single lot, the higher a 
plants productivity level.  
(E) The amount of capital investment made by automobile manufacturers in their 
factories determines the level of productivity.  106 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 4. According to the passage, which of the following statements is true of Japanese 
automobile workers?  
(A) Their productivity  levels did not equal those of United States automobile 
workers until the late seventies.  
(B) Their high efficiency levels are a direct result of cultural influences.  
(C) They operate component -specific machinery.  
(D) They are trained to do more than one j ob. 
(E) They produce larger lots of cars than do workers in United States factories.  
5. Which of the following best describes the organization of the first paragraph?  
(A) A thesis is presented and supporting examples are provided.  
(B) Opposing views are pr esented, classified, and then reconciled.  
(C) A fact is stated, and an explanation is advanced and then refuted.  
(D) A theory is proposed, considered, and then amended.  
(E) An opinion is presented, qualified, and then reaffirmed.  
6. It can be inferred f rom the passage that one problem associated with the 
production of huge lots of cars is which of the following?  
(A) The need to manufacture flexible machinery and equipment  
(B) The need to store extra components not required for immediate use  
(C) The need for expensive training programs for workers, which emphasize the 
development of facility in several production jobs  
(D) The need to alter conventional mass -production processes  
(E) The need to increase the investment per vehicle in order to achieve high 
productivity levels  
7. Which of the following statements is supported by information stated in the 
passage?  
(A) Japanese and United States automakers differ in their approach to production 
processes.  
(B) Japanese automakers have perfected the use of single -function equipment.  
(C) Japanese automakers invest more capital per employee than do United States 
automakers.  
(D) United States -owned factories abroad have higher production  levels than do 
Japanese owned plants in the United States.  
(E) Japanese automakers have benefited from the cultural heritage of their 
workers.  
8. With which of the following predictive statement regarding Japanese automakers 
would the author most likely agree?  
(A) The efficiency levels of the Japanese automake rs will decline if they become 
less flexible in their approach to production .  GMAT  107 
 (B) Japanese automakers productivity levels double during the late 1990s.  
(C) United States automakers will originate ne w production processes before 
Japanese automakers do.  
(D) Japanese automakers will hire fewer workers than will United States 
automakers because each worker is required to perform several jobs.  
(E) Japanese automakers will spend less on equipment repairs than will United 
States automakers because Japanese equipment can be easily altered.