Even as the number of females processed through juvenile courts climbs steadily, an 
implicit consensus remains among scholars in criminal justice that male adol escents define the 
delinquency problem in the United States. We suggest two reasons why this view persists. First, 
female adolescents are accused primarily of victimless crimes, such as truancy, that do not 
involve clear -cut damage to persons or p roperty . If committed by adults, these actions are not 
even considered prosecutable; if committed by juvenile males, they have traditionally been 
looked on leniently by the courts. Thus, ironically, the plight of female delinquents receives little 
scrutiny because they are accused of committing relatively minor offenses. Second, the courts 
have long justified so -called preventive intervention into the lives of young females viewed as 
antisocial with the rationale that women are especially vulnerable. Traditional ste reotypes of 
women as the weaker and more dependent sex have led to earlier intervention and longer 
periods of misdirected supervision for female delinquents than for males.  
17. Which of the following statements best expresses the irony pointed out by the 
authors in lines 13 -16 of the passage?  
(A) Female delinquents tend to commit victimless crimes more frequently than 
their ma le counterparts.  
(B) The predicament of male delinquents receives more attention than that of 
females because males are accused of mo re serious crimes.  
(C) Adults are frequently punished less severely than adolescents for committing 300 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 more serious crimes.  
(D) The juvenile justice system cannot correct its biases because it does not even 
recognize them.  
(E) Although the number of female delinquents is steadily increasing, the crimes 
of which they are accused are not particularly serious.  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that the authors believe traditional stereotypes 
of women to be  
(A) frequen tly challenged  
(B) persistently inexplicable  
(C) potentially harmful  
(D) rapidly changing  
(E) habitually disregarded  
19. The passage suggests that scholars in criminal justice could be criticized for 
which of the following?  
(A) Underestimating the serio usness of juvenile crime  
(B) Rationalizing the distinction made between juveniles and adults in the legal 
system  
(C) Concerning themselves too little with the prevention of juvenile delinquency  
(D) Focusing on those whose crimes have involved damage to per sons or 
property  
(E) Failing to point out injustices in the correctional system 