Agricultural progress provided the stimulus necessary to set off  economic expansion in 
medieval France. As long as those who worked the land were  barely able to ensure their own 
subsistence  and that of their landlords, all other activities had to be minimal, but when food 
surpluses increased, it became possible to release more people for governmental, commercial, 
religious and cultural pursuits.  
However, not all the funds from the agricultural surplus were actually available for 
commercial investment. Much of the surplus, in the form of food increases, probably went to 
raise the subsis tence level; an additional amount, in the form of currency gained from the sale 
of food, went into the royal treasury to be used in waging war. Although Louis VII of France 
levied a less crushing tax burden on his subjects than did England s Henry  II, Loui s VII did 
spend great sums on an unsuccessful crusade, and his vassals both lay and ecclesiastic took 
over spending where their sovereign stopped. Surplus funds were claimed both by the Church 
and by feudal landholders, whereupon  cathedrals and castles mushroomed throughout France.   GMAT  185 
 The simultaneous progress of cathedral building and, for instance, vineyard expansion in 
Bordeaux  illustrates the very real competition for avai lable capital between the Church and 
commercial interests; the former produced inestimable moral and artistic riches, but the latter 
had a stronger immediate impact upon gross national product. Moreover, though all wars by 
definition are defensive, the fre quent crossings of armies that lived off  the land and impartially 
burned all the huts and barns on their path consumed considerable resources.  
Since demands on the agricultural surplus would have varied from year to year , we cannot 
precisely calculate t heir impact on the commercial growth of medieval France. But we must 
bear that impact in mind when estimating the assets that were likely to have been available for 
investment. No doubt castle and cathedral building was not totally barren of profit (for th e 
builders, that is), and it produced intangible dividends of material and moral satisfaction for the 
community. Even wars handed back  a fragment of what they took, at least to a few. Still, we 
cannot place on the same plane a primarily destructive activity and a constructive one, nor 
expect the same results from a new bell tower as from a new water mill . Above all, medieval 
France had little room for investment over and above the  preservation of life. Granted that war 
cost much less  than it does today, that the Church rendered all sorts of educational and 
recreational services that were unobtainable elsewhere , and that government was far less 
demanding than is the modern state nevertheless, for medieval men and women, supporting 
commercial development required considerable economic sacrifice.  
1. According to the passage, agricultural revenues in excess of the amount needed 
for subsistence were used by medieval kings to  
(A) patronize the arts  
(B) sponsor public recreation  
(C) wage war  
(D) build cathedrals  
(E) fund public education  
2. According to the passage, which of the following was an important source of 
revenue in medieval France?  
(A) Cheese  
(B) Wine  
(C) Wool  
(D) Olive oil  
(E) Veal  
3. The passage suggests that which of the following would have reduced the assets 
immediately available for commercial investment in medieval France?  
I. Renovation of a larg e cathedral  
II. A sharp increase in the birth rate  
III. An invasion of France by Henry II  
(A) III only  
(B) I and II only  186 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
4. It can be inferred from the passage that more people could enter govern ment and 
the Church in medieval France because  
(A) the number of individual landholdings in heavily agricultural areas was 
beginning to increase  
(B) an increase in the volume of international trade had brought an increase in the 
population of cities  
(C) a decrease in warfare had allowed the king to decrease the size of the army  
(D) food producers could grow more food than they and their families needed to 
survive  
(E) landlords were prospering and thus were demanding a smaller percentage of 
tenants  annual yields  
5. The author implies that the reason we cannot expect the same results from a new 
bell tower as from a new water mill is that  
(A) bell towers yield an  intangible dividend  
(B) bell towers provide material satisfaction  
(C) water mills cost more to build than bell towers  
(D) water mills divert funds from commerce  
(E) water mills might well be destroyed by war  
6. The author of the passage most probably b ases his central argument on which of 
the following theoretical assumptions often made by economists?  
(A) Different people should be taxed in proportion to the benefit they can expect 
to receive from public activity.  
(B) Perfect competition exists only in the case where no farmer, merchant, or 
laborer controls a large enough share of the total market to influence market 
price.  
(C) A population wealthy enough to cut back its rate of consumption can funnel 
the resulting savings into the creation of capital.  
(D) A full -employment economy must always, to produce one good, give up 
producing another good.  
(E) There is a universal tendency for population, unless checked by food supply, 
to increase in a geometric progression.  
7. The author suggests that commercia l expansion in medieval France required 
considerable economic sacrifice  (lines 59 -60) primarily for which of the 
following reasons?  
(A) Cathedrals cost more to build and rebuild than did castles.  
(B) The numerous wars fought during the period left the ro yal treasury bankrupt.   GMAT  187 
 (C) Louis VII levied a more crushing tax burden on his subjects than did Henry 
II. 
(D) Although much of the available surplus had been diverted into vineyard 
expansion, the vineyards had not yet begun to produce.  
(E) Although more food was being produced, the subsistence level was not very 
far above the minimum required to sustain life.  
8. The passage implies that which of the following yielded the lowest dividend to 
medieval men and women relative to its cost?  
(A) Warfare  
(B) Vineyard expansion  
(C) Water mill construction  
(D) Castle building  
(E) Cathedral building  
9. Which of the following statements best expresses the central idea of the passage?  
(A) Commercial growth in medieval France may be accurately co mputed by 
calculating the number of castles and cathedrals built during the period.  
(B) Competition between the Church and the feudal aristocracy for funds created 
by agricultural surplus demonstrably slowed the economic growth of 
medieval France.  
(C) Desp ite such burdens as war and capital expansion by landholders, commerce 
in medieval France expanded steadily as the agricultural surplus increased.  
(D) Funds actually available for commerce in medieval France varied with the 
demands placed on the agricultur al surplus.  
(E) The simultaneous progress of vineyard expansion and building in medieval 
France gives evidence of a rapidly expanding economy.