In an unfinished but highly suggestive series of essays, the late Sarah Eisenstein has 
focused attention on the evolution of working womens values from the turn of the  century to 
the First World War. Eisenstein argues that turn -of-the-century women neither wholly accepted 
nor rejected what she calls the dominant ideology of domesticity, but rather took this and 
other available ideologies feminism, socialism, trade uni onism and modified or adapted them 
in light of their own experiences and needs. In thus maintaining that wage -work helped to 
produce a new consciousness among women, Eisenstein to some extent  challenges the  GMAT  277 
 recent, contro versial proposal by Leslie Tentler that for women the work experience  only served 
to reinforce the attractiveness of the dominant ideology. According to the Tentler, the degrading 
conditions under which many female wage earners w orked made them view the family as a 
source of power and esteem available nowhere else in their social world. In contrast, 
Eisensteins study insists that wage -work had other implications for womens identities and 
consciousness. Most importantly, her work  aims to demonstrate that wage -work enabled 
women to become aware of themselves as a distinct social group capable of defining their 
collective circumstance. Eisenstein insists that as a group working -class women were not able 
to come to collective conscio usness of their situation until they began entering the labor force, 
because domestic work tended to isolate them from one another.  
Unfortunately, Eisensteins unfinished study does not develop these ideas in sufficient 
depth or detail, offering tantalizin g hints rather than an exhaustive analysis. Whatever 
Eisensteins overall plan may have been, in its current form her study suffers from the limited 
nature of the sources she depended on. She uses the speeches and writings of reformers and 
labor organizers , who she acknowledges were far from representative, as the voice of the 
typical woman worker. And there is less than adequate attention given to the differing values of 
immigrant groups that made up a significant proportion of the population under investi gation. 
While raising important questions, Eisensteins essays do not provide definitive answer, and it 
remains for others to take up the challenges they offer.  
249. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) criticize a scholars assumptions and methodo logy 
(B) evaluate an approach to womens study  
(C) compare two sociological theories  
(D) correct a misconception about feminist theory  
(E) defend an unpopular ideology  
250. It can be inferred from the passage that, in Eisensteins view, working women at  
the turn of the century had which of the following attitudes toward the dominant 
ideology of their time?  
(A) They resented the dominant ideology as degrading.  
(B) They preferred the dominant ideology to other available ideologies.  
(C) They began to view t he dominant ideology  more favorably as a result of their 
experiences in the labor force.  
(D) They accepted some but not all aspects of the dominant ideology.  
(E) They believed that the dominant ideology isolated them from one another.  
251. Which of the following best describes the organization of the first paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) A chronological account of a historical development is presented, and th en 
future developments are predicted.  
(B) A term is defined according to several different schools of thought, and then a 
new definition is formulated.  278 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) A theory is presented, an alternative viewpoint is introduced, and then the 
reasoning behind the ini tial theory is summarized.  
(D) A tentative proposal is made, reasons for and against it are weighed, and then 
a modified version of the proposal is offered.  
(E) A controversy is described, its historical implications are assessed, and then a 
compromise is suggested.  
252. Which of the following would the author of the passage be most likely to approve 
as a continuation of Eisensteins study?  
(A) An oral his tory of prominent  women labor organizers  
(B) An analysis of letters and diaries written by typical female wage earners at the 
turn of the century  
(C) An assessment of what different social and political groups defined as the 
dominant ideology in the early twentieth century  
(D) A theoretical study of how socialism and feminism influenced one another at 
the turn of the century  
(E) A documentary account of labors role in the introduction of women into the 
labor force