Two divergent definitions have dominated sociologists discussions of the nature of 
ethnicity . The first emphasizes the primordial and unc hanging character of ethnicity. In this view, 
people have an essential need for belonging that is satisfied by membership in groups based on 
shared ancestry and culture. A different conception of ethnicity de -emphasizes the cultural 
component and defines e thnic groups as interest groups. In this view, ethnicity serves as a way 
of mobilizing a certain population behind issues relating to its economic position. While both of 
these definitions are useful, neither fully captures the dynamic and changing aspects  of 
ethnicity in the United States. Rather, ethnicity is more satisfactorily conceived of as a process 
in which preexisting communal bonds and common cultural attributes are adapted for 
instrumental purposes according to changing real -life situations.  
One example of this process is the rise of participation by Native American people in the 
broader United States political system since the Civil Rights movement of the 1960s. Besides 
leading Native Americans to participate more actively in politics (the numbe r of Native American 
legislative officeholders more than doubled), this movement also evoked increased interest in 
tribal history and traditional culture. Cultural and instrumental components of ethnicity are not 
mutually exclusive, but rather reinforce on e another.  
The Civil Rights movement also brought changes in the uses to which ethnicity was put by 154 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Mexican American people. In the 1960s, Mexican Americans formed community -based political 
groups that emphasized ancestral heritage as a way of mobilizing constituents. Such emerging 
issues as immigration and voting rights gave Mexican American advocacy groups the means by 
which to promote ethnic solidarity. Like European ethnic groups in the nineteenth -century 
United States, late -twentieth -century Mexican A merican leaders combined ethnic with 
contemporary civic symbols. In 1968 Henry Cisneros, then mayor of San Antonio, Texas, cited 
Mexican leader Benito Juarez as a model for Mexican Americans in their fight for contemporary 
civil rights. And every year, Mex ican Americans celebrate Cinco de Mayo  as fervently as many 
Irish American people embrace St. Patricks Day (both are major holidays in the countries of 
origin), with both holidays having been reinvented in the context of the United States and 
linked to id eals, symbols, and heroes of the United States.  
1. Which of the following best states the main idea of the passage?  
(A) In their definitions of the nature of ethnicity, sociologists have underestimated 
the power of the primordial human need to belong.  
(B) Ethnicity is best defined as a dynamic process that combines cultural 
components with shared political and economic interests.  
(C) In the United States in the twentieth century, ethnic groups have begun to 
organize in order to further their political and e conomic interests.  
(D) Ethnicity in the United States has been significantly changed by the Civil 
Rights movement.  
(E) The two definitions of ethnicity that have dominated sociologists discussions 
are incompatible and should be replaced by an entirely new approach.  
2. Which of the following statements about the first two definitions of ethnicity 
discussed in the fi rst paragraph is supported by the passage?  
(A) One is supported primarily by sociologists, and the other is favored by 
members of ethnic groups.  
(B) One emphasizes the political aspects of ethnicity, and the other focuses on the 
economic aspects.  
(C) One i s the result of analysis of United States populations, and the other is the 
result of analysis of European populations.  
(D) One focuses more on the ancestral components of ethnicity than does the 
other.  
(E) One focuses more on immigrant groups than does the other.  
3. The author of the passage refers to Native American people in the second 
paragraph in order to provide an example of  
(A) the ability of membership in groups based on shared ancestry and c ulture to 
satisfy an essential human need  
(B) how ethnic feelings have both motivated and been strengthened by political 
activity  
(C) how the Civil Rights movement can help promote solidarity among United  GMAT  155 
 States ethnic groups  
(D) how participation in the p olitical system has helped to improve a groups 
economic situation  
(E) the benefits gained from renewed study of ethnic history and culture  
4. The passage supports which of the following statements about the Mexican 
American community?  
(A) In the 1960s the Mexican American community began to incorporate the 
customs o f another ethnic group in the United States into the observation of 
its own ethnic holidays.  
(B) In the 1960s Mexican American community groups promoted ethnic 
solidarity primarily in order to effect economic change . 
(C) In the 1960s leader of the Mexica n American community concentrated their 
efforts on promoting a renaissance of ethnic history and culture . 
(D) In the 1960s members of the Mexican American community were becoming 
increasingly concerned about the issue of voting rights.  
(E) In the 1960s the Mexican American community had greater success in 
mobilizing constituents than did other ethnic groups in the United States.  
5. Which of the following types of ethnic cultural expression is discussed in the 
passage?  
(A) The retell ing of traditional narratives  
(B) The wearing of traditional clothing  
(C) The playing of traditional music  
(D) The celebration of traditional holidays  
(E) The preparation of traditional cuisine  
6. Information in the passage supports which of the followi ng statements about 
many European ethnic groups in the nineteenth -century United States?  
(A) They emphasized economic interests as a way of mobilizing constituents 
behind certain issues.  
(B) They conceived of their own ethnicity as being primordial in natu re. 
(C) They created cultural traditions that fused United States symbols with those 
of their countries of origin.  
(D) They de -emphasized the cultural components of their communities in favor of 
political interests.  
(E) They organized formal community groups designed to promote a renaissance 
of ethnic history and culture.  
7. The passage suggests that in 1968 Henry Cisneros most likely believed that  
(A) many Mexican American would respond positively to the example of Benito 
Juarez  
(B) many Mexican American were insufficiently educated in Mexican history  156 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) the fight for civil fights in the United States had many strong parallels in both 
Mexican and Irish history  
(D) the quickest way of organizing community -based gr oups was to emulate the 
tactics of Benito Juarez  
(E) Mexican Americans should emulate the strategies of Native American 
political leaders