There is widespread belief that the emergence of giant industries has been accompanied 
by an equivalent surge in industrial research. A recent study of important inventions made since 
the turn of the century reveals that more than half were the product of individual inventors 
working alone, independent of organized industrial research. While industrial laboratories 
contributed such import ant products as nylon and transistors, independent inventors developed 
air conditioning, the automatic transmission, the jet engine, the helicopter, insulin, and 
streptomycin. Still other inventions, such as stainless steel, television, silicones, and Plex iglas 
were developed through the combined efforts of individuals and laboratory teams.  
Despite these finding, we are urged to support  monopolistic  power on the grounds that 
such power creates an environment supportive of  innovation. We are told that the independent 
inventor, along with the small firm, cannot afford to undertake the important research needed  
to improve our standard  of living while protecting our diminishing resources; that only the giant 
corporation or con glomerate, with its prodigious assets, can afford the kind of expenditures 
that produce the technological advances vital to economic progress. But when we examine  GMAT  221 
 expenditures for research , we find that of the more than $35 billion spent each year in this 
country, almost two -thirds is spent by the federal government. More than half of this 
government expenditure is funneled  into military research and product development, 
accounting for the enormous increase  in spending in such industries as nuclear energy, aircraft, 
missiles, and electronics. There are those who consider it questionable  that these 
defense -linked research projects will either improve our standard of living or do much to protect 
our diminishing resources.  
Recent history has demonstrated that w e may have to alter our longstanding conception  of 
the process actuated by competition. The price variable, once perceived as the dominant aspect 
of the process, is now subordinate  to the competition of the new product, the new business 
structure, and the new technology. While it can be assumed that in a highly competitive 
industry not dominated by single corporation, investment in innovation a risky and expensive 
budget item might  meet resistance from management and stockholders concerned about 
cost-cuttin g, efficient organization, and large advertising budgets, it would be an egregious 
error to equate the monopolistic producer with bountiful expenditures on research. Large-scale 
enterprises  tend to operate more comfortably in stable and secure circumstance s, and their 
managerial bureaucracies  tend to promote the status quo and resist the threat implicit in 
change. Moreover, in some cases, industrial giants faced with little or no competition seek to 
avoid the capital loss resulting from obsolescence by deli berately obstructing technological 
progress. By contrast , small firms undeterred  by large investments in plant and capital 
equipment often aggressively pursue new techniques and new products , investing in innovation 
in order to expand their market  shares.  
The conglomerates are not, however, completely except from strong competitive pressures. 
There are instances in which  they too must compete with another industrial Goliath, and then 
their weapons may include large expenditures for innovation.  
1. The primar y purpose of the passage is to  
(A) advocate an increase in government support of organized industrial research  
(B) point out a common misconception about the relationship  between the extent 
of industrial research and  the growth of monopolistic power in ind ustry  
(C) describe the inadequacies of small firms in dealing with the important matter 
of research and innovation  
(D) show  that America s strength depends upon individual ingenuity and 
resourcefulness  
(E) encourage free -market competition among industrial giants  
2. According to the passage , important inventions of the twentieth century  
(A) were produced largely as a result of governmental support for military 
weapons research and development  
(B) cam e primarily from the huge laboratories of monopolistic industries  
(C) were produced at least as frequently by independent inventors as by research 
teams  
(D) have greater impact on smaller firms than on conglomerates  222 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) sometimes adversely affect our st andard of living and diminish our natural 
resources  
3. Which of the following best describes the organization of the second paragraph  of 
the passage?  
(A) Expenditures for various aspects of research are listed.  
(B) Reasons for supporting  monopolistic power  are given and then questioned.  
(C) Arguments are presented for minimizing  competitive bidding for research.  
(D) Resources necessary for research are defined.  
(E) Costs for varied aspects of military research are questioned.  
4. It can be inferred from the passage that the author  
(A) has little confidence in the ability of monopolistic industry to produce the 
important inventions of the future  
(B) would rathe r see the federal government spend money on social services than 
on the defense establishment  
(C) favors a conservative approach to innovation and places trust in 
conglomerates to provide efficient production  
(D) feels that price should still be the domina nt variable in the  competitive 
process  
(E) believes that excessive competition is a deterrent to innovation  
5. The passage contains information that answers which of the following questions?  
I. What  portion of the research dollar in this country  is spent each year by the 
federal government?  
II. Under what circumstances is an industrial giant likely to invest  heavily in 
innovation ? 
III. Why might a monopolistic producer want to suppress an innovation?  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
6. With w hich of the following statements would the author of the passage be most 
likely to agree?  
(A) Monopolistic power creates an environment supportive of innovation.  
(B) Governmental expenditure for military research will do much to protect our 
dwindling resou rces. 
(C) Industrial giants, with their managerial bureaucracies, respond  more quickly 
to technological change than smaller firms do.  
(D) Firms with a small share of the market aggressively  pursue innovations  GMAT  223 
 because they are not locked into old capital eq uipment.  
(E) The independent inventor cannot afford to undertake the research needed to 
improve our standard of living.  
7. Which of the following proposals best responds to the issues raised by the 
author?  
(A) Governmental restraints on monopolies shoul d be lifted, and government 
funding should be made available to large corporations wishing to engage in 
research.  
(B) Governmental restraints  on monopolies should be tightened, and government 
funding should be made available to small corporations and indep endent 
individuals wishing to engage in research.  
(C) Governmental restraints on monopolies should be tightened, and no 
government funding should be provided to any corporations or individuals 
wishing to engage in research.  
(D) The amount the government sp ends on military research should be decreased, 
and the amount it spends to improved the standard of living should be 
increased.  
(E) Governmental restraints on monopolies should be lifted, and no government 
funding should be provided to any corporations or individuals wishing to 
engage in research.  
8. Which of the following, if true, would most weaken the author s main point?  
(A) In the last decade, conglomerates have significantly increased their research 
budgets for defense technology.  
(B) Tax restructu ring permits smaller firms to write off a larger percentage of 
profits against research.  
(C) A ten -year study of the extent  of resources devoted to research by smaller 
enterprises reveals a steady decline.  
(D) Military research is being directed more exten sively  to space technology than 
to short -range missiles.  
(E) Competition from foreign industries  has increased the cost of labor and 
materials.