In contrast to traditional analyses of minority business, the sociological analysis contends 
that minori ty business ownership is a group -level phenomenon, in that it is largely dependent 
upon social -group resources for its development. Specifically, this analysis indicates that 
support networks play a critical role in starting and maintaining minority busine ss enterprises 
by providing owners with a range of assistance, from the informal encouragement of family 
members and friends to dependable sources of labor and clientele from the owners ethnic 
group . Such self -help networks, which encourage and support ethnic minority entrepreneurs, 
consist of primary institutions, those closest to the individual in shaping his or her behavior 
and beliefs. They are characterized by the face -to-face associa tion and cooperation of persons 
united by ties of mutual concern. They form an intermediate social level between the individual 
and larger secondary  institutions based on impersonal relationships. Primary institutions 
comprising the support network inclu de kinship, peer, and neighborhood or community 
subgroups.  
A major function of self -help networks is financial support. Most scholars agree that 
minority business owners have depended primarily on family funds and ethnic community 
resources for investment capital. Personal savings have been accumulated, often through frugal 
living habits that require sacrifices by the entire family and are thus a product of long -term 
family financial behavior. Additional loans and gifts from relatives, forthcoming because o f 
group obligation rather than narrow investment calculation, have supplemented personal 
savings. Individual entrepreneurs do not necessarily rely on their kin because they cannot 
obtain financial backing from commercial resources. They may actually avoid banks because 
they assume that commercial institutions either cannot comprehend the special needs of 
minority enterprise or charge unreasonably high interest rates.  
Within the larger ethnic community, rotating credit associations have been used to raise 
capital. These associations are informal clubs of friends and other trusted members of the 
ethnic group who make regular contributions to a fund that is given to each contributor in 
rotation. One author estimates that 40 percent of New York Chinatown firms e stablished during 
1900-1950 utilized such associations as their initial source of capital. However, recent 
immigrants and third or fourth generations of older groups now employ rotating credit 52 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 associations only occasionally to raise investment funds. Some groups, like Black Americans, 
found other means of financial support for their entrepreneurial efforts. The first Black -operated 
banks were created in the late nineteenth century as depositories  for dues collected from 
fraternal or lodge groups, which themselves had sprung from Black churches. Black banks 
made limited investments in other Black enterprises. Irish immigrants in American cities 
organized many building and loan associations to provide capital for home construction and 
purchase. They , in turn, provided work for many Irish home -building contractor firms. Other 
ethnic and minority groups followed similar practices in founding ethnic -directed financial 
institutions.  
1. Based on the information in the passage, it would be LEAST likely for which of 
the following persons to be part of a self -help network?  
(A) The entrepreneurs childhood friend  
(B) The entrepreneurs aunt  
(C) The entrepreneurs religious leader  
(D) The e ntrepreneurs neighbor  
(E) The entrepreneurs banker  
2. Which of the following illustrates the working of a self -help support network, as 
such networks are described in the passage?  
(A) A public high school offers courses in book -keeping and accounting as part of 
its open -enrollment adult education program.  
(B) The local government in a small city sets up a program that helps teen -agers 
find summer jobs.  
(C) A major commercial bank offers low -interest loans to experienced individuals 
who hope to establis h their own businesses.  
(D) A neighborhood -based fraternal organization develops a program of 
on-the-job training for its members and their friends.  
(E) A community college offers country residents training programs that can lead 
to certification in a variety of technical trades.  
3. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about rotatin g credit 
associations?  
(A) They were developed exclusively by Chinese immigrants.  
(B) They accounted for a significant portion of the investment capital used by 
Chinese immigrants in New York in the early twentieth century.  
(C) Third -generation members of an immigrant group who started businesses in 
the 1920s would have been unlikely to rely on them.  
(D) They were frequently joint endeavors by members of two or three different 
ethnic groups.  
(E) Recent immigrants still frequently turn to rotating credit associations instead 
of banks for investment capital.   GMAT  53 
 4. The passage best supports which of the following statements?  
(A) A minority entrepreneur who had no assistance from family members w ould 
not be able to start a business.  
(B) Self -help networks have been effective in helping entrepreneurs primarily in 
the last 50 years.  
(C) Minority groups have developed a range of alternatives to standard financing 
of business ventures.  
(D) The financi al institutions founded by various ethnic groups owe their success 
to their unique formal organization.  
(E) Successful minority -owned businesses succeed primarily because of the 
personal strengths of their founders.  
5. Which of the following best describes the organization of the second paragraph ? 
(A) An argument is delineated,  followed by a counter -argument.  
(B) An assertion is made and several examples are provided to illustrate it.  
(C) A situation is described and its historical background is then outlined.  
(D) An example of a phenomenon is given and is then used as a basis f or general 
conclusions.  
(E) A group of parallel incidents is described and the distinctions among the 
incidents are then clarified.  
6. According to the passage, once a minority -owned business is established, 
self-help networks contribute which of the following to that busines s? 
(A) Information regarding possible expansion of the business into nearby 
communities  
(B) Encouragement of a business climate that is nearly free of direct competition  
(C) Opportunities for the business owner to reinvest profits in other 
minority -owned b usinesses  
(D) Contact with people who are likely to be customers of the new business  
(E) Contact with minority entrepreneurs who are members of other ethnic groups  
7. It can be inferred from the passage that traditional analyses of minority business 
would be LEAST likely to do which of the following?  
(A) Examine businesses primarily in  their social contexts  
(B) Focus on current, rather than historical, examples of business enterprises  
(C) Stress common experiences of individual entrepreneurs in starting businesses  
(D) Focus on the maintenance of businesses, rather than means of starting  them  
(E) Focus on the role of individual entrepreneurs in starting a business  
8. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about the Irish building 
and loan associations mentioned in the last paragraph?  
(A) They were started by third - or fourt h-generation immigrants.  54 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) They originated as offshoots of church -related groups.  
(C) They frequently helped Irish entrepreneurs to finance business not connected 
with construction.  
(D) They contributed to the employment of many Irish construction worker s. 
(E) They provided assistance for construction businesses owned by members of 
other ethnic groups.