Behavior is one of two general responses available to endothermic  (warm -blooded) species 
for the regulation of body temperature, the other being inna te (reflexive) mechanisms of heat 
production and heat loss. Human beings rely primarily on the first to provide a hospitable 
thermal microclimate  for themselves, in which the transfer of heat between the body and  the 
environment is accomplished with minimal involvement of innate mechanisms of heat 
production and loss. Thermoregulatory  behavior anticipates hyperthermia, and the organism 
adjusts its behavior to avoid becoming hyperthermic: it removes layers of clothing, it goes for a 
cool swim, etc. The organism can also respond to changes in the temperature of the body core, 
as is the case during exercise; but such responses result from the direct stimulation of 
thermoreceptor s distributed widely within the central nervous system , and the ability of these 
mechanisms to help the organism adjust to gross changes in its environment is limited.  
Until recently it was assumed that organisms respond to microwave radiation in the same 
way that they respond to temperature changes ca used by other forms of radiation. After all, the 
argument runs, microwaves are radiation and heat body tissues. This theory ignores the fact 
that the stimulus to a behavioral response is normally a temperature change that occurs at the 
surface of the organ ism. The thermoreceptors that prompt behavioral changes are located 
within the first millimeter of the skin s surface, but the energy of a microwave field  may be  GMAT  177 
 selectively deposited in deep tissues, effectively bypassing these thermoreceptors, particularly 
if the field is at near -resonant frequencies. The resulting temperature profile  may well be a kind 
of reve rse thermal gradient in which the deep tissues are warmed more than those of the 
surface. Since the heat is not conducted outward to the surface to stimulate the appropriate 
receptors, the organism does not appreciate  this stimulation in the same way tha t it 
appreciates  heating and cooling of the skin. In theory , the internal organs of a human being 
or an animal could be quite literally cooked well-done before the animal even realizes that the 
balance of its thermomicroclimate has been disturbed.  
Until a few years ago, microwave i rradiations at equivalent plane -wave power densities of 
about 100 mW/cm2 were considered unequivocally to produce thermal  effects; irradiations 
within the range of 10 to 100 mW/cm2 might or might not produce thermal  effects; while 
effects observed at p ower densities below 10 mW/cm2 were assumed to be nonthermal  in 
nature. Experiments have shown this to be an oversimplification, and a recent report suggests 
that fields as weak as 1 mW/cm2 can be thermogenic. When the heat generated in the tissues 
by an  imposed radio frequency  (plus the heat generated by metabolism) exceeds the heat -loss 
capabilities of the organism, the thermoregulatory system has been compromised. Yet 
surprisingly, not long ago , an inc rease in the internal body temperature was regarded merely as 
evidence  of a thermal effect.  
1. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) showing that behavior is a more effective way of controlling bodily 
temperature than innate mechanisms  
(B) criticizi ng researchers who will not discard their theories about the effects of 
microwave radiation on organisms  
(C) demonstrating that effects of microwave radiation are different from those of 
other forms of radiation  
(D) analyzing the mechanism by which an orga nism maintains its bodily 
temperature in a changing thermal environment  
(E) discussing the importance of thermoreceptors in the control of the internal 
temperature of an organism  
2. The author makes which of the following points about innate mechanisms for 
heat production?  
I. They are governed by thermoreceptors inside the body of the organism 
rather than at the surface.  
II. They are a less effective means of compensating for gross changes in 
temperature than behavioral strategies.  
III. They are not affe cted by microwave radiation.  
(A) I only  
(B) I and II only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  178 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 3. Which of the following would be the most logical topic for the author to take up  
in the paragraph following the final paragraph of the selection?  
(A) A suggestion for new research to be done on the effects of microwa ves on 
animals and human beings  
(B) An analysis of the differences between microwave radiation  
(C) A proposal that the use of microwave radiation be prohibited because it is 
dangerous  
(D) A survey of the literature on the effects of microwave radiation on human 
beings  
(E) A discussion of the strategies used by various species to control hyperthermia  
4. The author s strategy in lines 39 -42 is to  
(A) introduce a hypothetical example to dramatize a point  
(B) propose an experiment to test a scientific hypothesis  
(C) cit e a case study to illustrate a general contention  
(D) produce a counterexample to disprove an opponent s theory  
(E) speculate about the probable consequences of a scientific phenomenon  
5. The author implies that the proponents of the theory that microwa ve radiation 
acts on organisms in the same way as other forms of radiation based their 
conclusions primarily on  
(A) laboratory research  
(B) unfounded assumption  
(C) control group surveys  
(D) deductive reasoning  
(E) causal investigation  
6. The tone of th e passage can best be described as  
(A) genial and conversational  
(B) alarmed and disparaging  
(C) facetious and cynical  
(D) scholarly and noncommittal  
(E) scholarly and concerned  
7. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) pointing out weaknesses in a popular scientific theory  
(B) developing a hypothesis to explain a scientific phenomenon  
(C) reporting on new research on the effects of microwave radiation  
(D) criticizing the research methods of earlier investigators  
(E) clarifying ambiguities in the terminology used to describe a phenomenon   GMAT  179