Archaeology as a profession faces two major problems. First, it is the poorest of the poor. 
Only paltry sums are available for excavating and even less is available for publishing the result s 
and preserving the sites once excavated. Yet archaeologists deal with priceless objects every 
day. Second, there is the problem of illegal excavation, resulting in museum -quality pieces 
being sold to the highest bidder.  
I would like to make an outrageous  suggestion that would at one stroke  provide funds for 
archaeology and reduce the amount of illegal digging. I would propose that scientific 
archeological expeditions and governmental auth orities sell excavated artifacts on the open 
market. Such sales would provide substantial funds for the excavation and preservation of 
archaeological sites and the publication of results. At the same time, they would break the 
illegal excavators grip on t he market, thereby decreasing the inducement to engage in illegal 
activities.  
You might object that professionals excavate to acquire knowledge, not money. Moreover, 
ancient artifacts are part of our global cultural heritage, which should be available for all to 
appreciate, not sold to the highest bidder. I agree. Sell nothing that has unique artistic merit or 
scientific value. But, you might reply everything that comes ou t of the ground has scientific 
value. Here we part company. Theoretically, you may be correct in claiming that every artifact 
has potential scientific value. Practically, you are wrong.  
I refer to the thousands of pottery vessels and ancient lamps that are essentially duplicates 
of one another. In one small excavation in Cyprus, archaeologi sts recently uncovered 2,000 
virtually indistinguishable small jugs in a single courtyard, Even precious royal seal impressions 
known as  lmelekh  handles have been found in abundance more than 4,000 examples so far.  
The basements of museums are simply not large enough to store the artifacts that are 
likely to be discovered in the future. There is not enough money even to catalogue the finds; as 
a result, they cannot be found again and become as inaccessible as if they had never been 
discovered. Indeed, with  the help of a computer, sold artifacts could be more accessible than 
are the pieces stored in bulging museum basements. Prior to sale, each could be photographed 
and the list of the purchasers could be maintained on the computer . A purchaser could even be  
required to agree to return the piece if it should become needed for scientific purposes.   GMAT  29 
 It would be unrealistic to suggest that illegal digging would stop if artifacts were sold on 
the open market. But the demand for the clandestine product would be sub stantially reduced. 
Who would want an unmarked pot when another was available whose provenance was known, 
and that was dated stratigraphically  by the professional archaeologist who excavated it?  
1. The primary purpose of the  passage is to propose  
(A) an alternative to museum display of artifacts  
(B) a way to curb illegal digging while benefiting the archaeological profession  
(C) a way to distinguish artifacts with scientific value from those that have no 
such value  
(D) the go vernmental regulation of archaeological sites  
(E) a new system for cataloguing duplicate artifacts  
2. The author implies that all of the following statements about duplicate artifacts 
are true EXCEPT:  
(A) A market for such artifacts already exists.  
(B) Such artifacts seldom have scientific value.  
(C) There is likely to be a continuing supply of such artifacts.  
(D) Museums are well supplied with examples of such artifacts.  
(E) Such artifacts frequently exceed in quality those already catalogued in 
museum collections.  
3. Which of the following is mentioned in the passage as a disadvantage of storing 
artifacts in museum basements?  
(A) Museum officials rarely allow scholars access to such artifacts.  
(B) Space that could be better used for display is taken up for storage.  
(C) Artifacts discovered in o ne excavation often become separated from each 
other.  
(D) Such artifacts are often damaged by variations in temperature and humidity.  
(E) Such artifacts often remain uncatalogued and thus cannot be located once 
they are put in storage.  
4. The author mentions the excavation in Cyprus ( lines 31 -34) to emphasize which 
of the following points?  
(A) Ancient lamp s and pottery vessels are less valuable, although more rare, than 
royal seal impressions.  
(B) Artifacts that are very similar to each other present cataloguing difficulties to 
archaeologists.  
(C) Artifacts that are not uniquely valuable, and therefore coul d be sold, are 
available in large quantities.  
(D) Cyprus is the most important location for unearthing large quantities of 
salable artifacts.  30 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) Illegal sales of duplicate artifacts are wide -spread, particularly on the island 
of Cyprus.  
5. The authors argument concerning the effect of the official sale of duplicate 
artifacts on illegal excavation is based on which of the following assumpti ons? 
(A) Prospective purchasers would prefer to buy authenticated artifacts.  
(B) The price of illegally excavated artifacts would rise.  
(C) Computers could be used to trace sold artifacts.  
(D) Illegal excavators would be forced to sell only duplicate artif acts. 
(E) Money gained from selling authenticated artifacts could be used to investigate 
and prosecute illegal excavators.  
6. The author anticipates which of the following initial objections to the adoption of 
his proposal?  
(A) Museum officials will become u nwilling to store artifacts.  
(B) An oversupply of salable artifacts will result and the demand for them will 
fall. 
(C) Artifacts that would have been displayed in public places will be sold to 
private collectors.  
(D) Illegal excavators will have an even la rger supply of artifacts for resale.  
(E) Counterfeiting of artifacts will become more commonplace.  
7. The author implies that which of the following would occur if duplicate artifacts 
were sold on the open market?  
I. Illegal excavation would eventually cease completely.  
II. Cyprus would b ecome the primary source of marketable duplicate artifacts . 
III. Archaeologists would be able to publish the results of their excavations more 
frequently than they currently do.  
(A) I only  
(B) III only 
(C) I and  II only  
(D) II and III only 
(E) I, II, and III