The health -care economy is replete with unusual and even unique economic relationships. 
One of the least u nderstood involves the peculiar roles of producer or provider  and purchaser 
or consumer  in the typical doctor -patient relationship. In most sectors of the economy, it is 
the seller who attempts to attract a potential buyer with various inducements of p rice, quality, 
and utility, and it is the buyer who makes the decision. Where circumstances permit the buyer 
no choice because there is effectively  only one seller and the product is relatively essential, 
government usually asserts m onopoly and places the industry under price and other regulations. 
Neither of these conditions prevails in most of the health -care industry.  
In the health -care industry, the doctor -patient relationship is the mirror image  of the 
ordinary relationship  between producer and consumer. Once an individual has chosen to see a 
physician and even then there may be no real choice it is the physician who usually makes all 
significant purchasing decisions: whether the patient should retu rn next Wednesday,  whether 
X-rays are needed, whether drugs should be prescribed, etc. It is a rare and sophisticated 
patient who will challenge such professional decisions or raise in advance  questions about price, 
especially when the ailment is regarded as serious.  
This is particularly significant in relation to  hospital care. The physician must certify the 
need for hospitalization, determine what procedu res will be performed, and announce when the 
patient may be discharged. The  patient may be consulted about some of these decisions, but in 
the main  it is the doctor s judgments that are final. Little wonder then that in the eyes of  the 
hospital it is the physician who is the real  consumer . As a consequence,  the medical staff 
represents the power center  in hospital policy and decision -making, not the administration.  
Although usually there are in this s ituation four identifiable participants the physician, the 
hospital, the patient, and the payer (generally an insurance carrier or government) the 
physician makes the essential decisions for all of them. The hospital becomes an extension of 
the physician; the payer generally meets most of the bona fide  bills generated by the 
physician/hospital; and for the most part  the patient plays a passive role. In routine or minor 
illnesses, or just plain worries, the patient s options are, of course, much greater with respect to  
use and price. In illnesses that are of some significance, however, such choices tend to 
evaporate , and it is for these il lnesses that the bulk of the health -care dollar is spent. We 164 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 estimate that about 75 -80 percent of health -care expenditures are determined by physicians, 
not patients. For this reason, economy measures directed at patients or the general public are 
relative ly ineffective.  
1. The author s primary purpose is to  
(A) speculate about the relationship between a patient s ability to pay and the 
treatment received  
(B) criticize doctors for exercising too much control over patients  
(C) analyze some important economic  factors in health care  
(D) urge hospitals to reclaim their decision -making authority  
(E) inform potential patients of their health -care rights  
2. It can be inferred that doctors are able to determine hospital policies because  
(A) it is doctors who gene rate income for the hospital  
(B) most of a patient s bills are paid by his health insurance  
(C) hospital administrators lack the expertise to question medical decisions  
(D) a doctor is ultimately responsible for a patient s health  
(E) some patients migh t refuse to accept their physician s advice  
3. According to the author, when a doctor tells a patient to return next Wednesday,  
the doctor is in effect  
(A) taking advantage of the patient s concern for his health  
(B) instructing the patient to buy more m edical services  
(C) warning the patient that a hospital stay might be necessary  
(D) advising the patient to seek a second opinion  
(E) admitting that the initial visit was ineffective  
4. The author is most probably leading up to  
(A) a proposal to control medical costs  
(B) a discussion of a new medical treatment  
(C) an analysis of the causes of inflation in the United States  
(D) a study of lawsuits against doctors for malpractice  
(E) a comparison of hospitals and factories  
5. The tone of the passage can best be described as  
(A) whimsical  
(B) cautious  
(C) analytical  
(D) inquisitive  
(E) de fiant 
6. With which of the following statements would the author be likely to agree?   GMAT  165 
 I. Most patients are reluctant to object to the course of treatment prescribed by 
a doctor or to question the cost of the services.  
II. The more serious the illness of a p atient, the less likely it is that the patient 
will object to the course of treatment prescribed or to question the cost of 
services.  
III. The payer, whether insurance carrier or the government, is less likely to 
acquiesce to demands for payment when the i llness of the patient is regarded 
as serious.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
7. The author s primary concern is to  
(A) define a term  
(B) clarify a misunderstanding  
(C) refute a theory  
(D) discuss a proble m 
(E) announce a new discovery  
8. The most important feature of a consumer  as that term is used in line 33  of the 
passage is that the consumer  is the party that  
(A) pays for goods or services  
(B) delivers goods or services  
(C) orders goods or services  
(D) reimburses a third party for goods or services  
(E) supplies goods and services to a third party