Four legal approaches may be followed in attempting to channel technological 
development in socially useful  direction: specific directives, market incentive modifications, 
criminal prohibitions, and changes in decision -making structures. Specific directives involve the 
government s identifying one or more factors controlling research, development, or 
implementation of a given technology. Directives affecting such factors may vary from 
administrative regulation of private activity to government ownership of a technological 296 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 operation. Market incentive modifications are deliberate alterations of the market within which 
private decisions regarding the development and implementatio n of technology are made. Such 
modifications may consist of imposing  taxes to cover the costs t o society of a given technology, 
granting subsidies to pay for social benefits of a technology, creating the right to sue to prevent 
certain technological develo pment, or easing procedural rules to enable the recovery of 
damages to compensate for harm caused by destructive technological activity. Criminal 
prohibitions may modify technological activity in areas impinging on fundamental social values, 
or they may mo dify human behavior likely to result from technological applications for 
example, the deactivation of automotive pollution control devices in order to improve vehicle 
performance. Alteration of decision -making structures includes all possible modifications  in the 
authority, constitution, or responsibility of private and public entities deciding questions of 
technological development and implementation. Such alterations include the addition  of 
public -interest members to corporate boards, the imposition by st atute of duties on 
governmental decision -makers, and the extension of warranties in response to consumer 
action.  
Effective use of these methods to control technology depends on whether or not the goal 
of regulation is the  optimal allocation of resources. W hen the object is optimal resource 
allocation, that combination of legal methods should be used that most nearly yields the 
allocation that would exist if there were no external costs resulting from allocating resources 
through market activity. There are e xternal costs when the price set by buyers and sellers of 
goods fails to include some costs, to anyone, that result from the production and use of the 
goods. Such costs are internalized when buyers pay them.  
Air pollution from motor vehicles imposes extern al costs on all those exposed to it, in the 
form of soiling, materials damage, and disease: these externalities result from failure to place a 
price on air, thus making it a free good, common to all. Such externalities lead to nonoptimal 
resource allocatio n, because the private net product and the social net product of market 
activity are not often identical. If all externalities were internalized, transactions would occur  
until bargaining could no longer improve the situation, thus giving an optimal alloca tion of 
resources at a given time.  
17. The passage is primarily concerned with describing  
(A) objectives and legal method for directing technological development  
(B) technical approaches to the problem of controlling market activity  
(C) economic procedures  for facilitating transactions between buyers and sellers  
(D) reasons for slowing the technological development in light of 
environmentalist objections  
(E) technological innovations making it possible to achieve optimum allocation of 
resources  
18. The a uthor cites air pollution from motor vehicles in lines 54 -56 in order to  
(A) revise cost estimates calculated by including the costs of resources  
(B) evaluate legal methods used to prevent technological developments  
(C) give examples of costs not included in buyer -seller bargains   GRE  297 
 (D) refute hypotheses not made on the basis of monetary exchange values  
(E) commend technological research undertaken for the common welfare  
19. According to the passage, transactions between private buyers and sellers have 
effects on society that generally  
(A) are harmful when all factors are considered  
(B) give rise to e ver-increasing resource costs  
(C) reflect an optimal allocation of natural resources  
(D) encompass more than the effects on the buyers and sellers alone  
(E) are guided by legal controls on the development of technology  
20. It can be inferred from the pa ssage that the author does NOT  favor which of the 
following?  
(A) Protecting the environment for future use  
(B) Changing the balance of power between opposing interests in business  
(C) Intervening in the activity of the free market  
(D) Making prices reflect  costs to everyone in society  
(E) Causing technological development to cease  
21. A gasoline -conservation tax on the purchase of large automobiles, with the 
proceeds of the tax rebated to purch asers of small automobiles, is an example of  
(A) a specific directive  
(B) a market incenti ve modification  
(C) an optimal resource allocation  
(D) an alteration of a decision -making structure  
(E) an external cost  
22. If there were no external costs, as they are described in the passage, which of the 
following would be true?  
(A) All technology -control methods would be effective.  
(B) Some resource allocations would be illegal.  
(C) Prices would include all costs to members of society.  
(D) Some decision -making structures would be altered.  
(E) The availability of common goods would increase.  
23. The author assumes that, in determining what would be an optimal allocation of 
resources, it would  be possible to  
(A) assign  monetary value to all damage resulting from the use of technology  
(B) combine legal methods to yield the theoretical optimum  
(C) co nvince buyers to bear the burden of damage from technological 
developments  
(D) predict the costs of new technological developments  298 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) derive an equation making costs depend on prices  
24. On the basis of the passage, it can be inferred that the author would agree with 
which of the following statements concerning technological development?  
(A) The government should own technologica l operations.  
(B) The effect of technological development cannot be controlled.  
(C) Some technological developments are beneficial.  
(D) The current state of technological development results in a good allocation of 
resources.  
(E) Applications of technol ogical developments are criminally destructive.  