All of the cells in a particular plant start out  with the same complement of genes. How then 
can these cel ls differentiate and form structures as different as roots, stems, leaves, and fruits? 
The answer is that only a small subset of the genes in a particular kind of cell are expressed, or 
turned on, at a given time. This is accomplished by a complex system o f chemical messengers 
that in plants include hormones and other regulatory molecules. Five major hormones have 
been identified: auxin, abscisic acid , cytokinin, ethylene, and gibberellin. Studies of plants have 
now identified a new class of regulatory molecules called oligosaccharins.  
Unlike the oligosaccharins, the five well -known plant hormones are pleiotropic rather than 
specific; that is, e ach has more than one effect on the growth and development of plants. The 
five has so many simultaneous effects that they are not very useful in artificially controlling the 
growth of crops. Auxin, for instance, stimulates the rate of cell elongation, caus es shoots to 
grow up and roots to grow down, and inhibits the growth of lateral shoots. Auxin also causes 
the plant to develop a vascular system, to form lateral roots, and to produce ethylene.  
The pleiotropy of the five well -studied plant hormones is some what analogous to that of 
certain hormones in animal. For example, hormones from the hypothalamus in the brain 
stimulate the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland  to synthesize and release many different 
hormones, one of which s timulates the release of hormones from the adrenal cortex . These 
hormones have specific effects on target organs all over the body. One hormone stimulates the 
thyroid gland, for example, another the ovarian follicle  cells, and so forth. In other words, there 
is a hierarchy of hormones. Such a hierarchy may also exist in plants. Oligosaccharins are 
fragments of the cell wall released by enzymes: different enzymes release different 
oligosaccharins. There are indi cations that pleiotropic plant hormones may actually function by 
activating the enzymes that release these other, more specific chemical messengers from the 
cell wall.  
1. According to the passage, the five well -known plant hormones are not useful in 
contro lling the growth of crops because  
(A) it is not known exactly what functions the hormones perform  
(B) each hormone has various effects on plants  
(C) none of the hormones can function without the others  
(D) each hormone has different effects on different ki nds of plants  
(E) each hormone works on only a small subset of a cells genes at any particular 
time 66 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 2. The passage suggests that the place of hypothalamic hormones in the hormonal 
hierarchies of animals is similar to the place of which of the following  in plants?  
(A) Plant cell walls  
(B) The complement of genes in each plant cell  
(C) A subset of a plant cells gene complement  
(D) The five major hormones  
(E) The oligosaccharins  
3. The passage suggests that which of the following is a function likely t o be 
performed by an oligosaccharin?  
(A) To stimulate a particular plant cell to become part of a plants root system  
(B) To stimulate the walls of a particular cell to produce other oligosaccharins  
(C) To activate enzymes that release specific chemical me ssengers from plant cell 
walls  
(D) To duplicate the gene complement in a particular plant cell  
(E) To produce multiple effects on a particular subsystem of plant cells  
4. The author mentions specific effects that auxin has on plant development in order 
to illustrate the  
(A) point that some of the effects of plant hormones can be harmful  
(B) way in which hormones are produced by plants  
(C) hierarchical nature of the functioning of plant hormones  
(D) differences among the best -known plant hormones  
(E) concept of pleiotropy as it is exhibited by plant hormones  
5. According to the passage, which o f the following best describes a function 
performed by oligosaccharins?  
(A) Regulating the daily functioning of a plants cells  
(B) Interacting with one another to produce different chemicals  
(C) Releasing specific chemical messengers from a plants cell w alls 
(D) Producing the hormones that cause plant cells to differentiate to perform 
different functions  
(E) Influencing the development of a plants cells by controlling the expression of 
the cells genes  
6. The passage suggests that, unlike the pleiotropic hormones, oligosaccharins could 
be used effectively to  
(A) trace the passage of chemicals through the walls of cells  
(B) pinpoint functions of other plant hormones  
(C) artificially control specific aspects of the development of crops  
(D) alter the complement of genes in the cells of plants   GMAT  67 
 (E) alter the effects of the five major hormones on plant de velopment  
7. The author discusses animal hormones primarily in order to  
(A) introduce the idea of a hierarchy of hormones  
(B) explain the effects that auxin has on plant cells  
(C) contrast the functioning of plant hormones and animals hormones  
(D) illustra te the way in which particular hormones affect animals  
(E) explain the distinction between hormones and regulatory molecules