It was once believed that the brain was independent of metabolic processes occurring 
elsewhere in the body. In recent studies, however, we have discovered that the production and 
release in brain neurons of the neurotransmitter serotonin  (neurotransmitters are compounds 
that neurons use to transmit signals to other c ells) depend directly on the food that the body 
processes.  
Our first studies sought to determine whether the increase in serotonin observed in rats 
given a large injection of the amino acid tryptophan might also occur after rats ate meals that 
change trypt ophan levels in the blood. We found that, immediately after the rats began to eat, 
parallel elevations occurred in blood tryptophan, brain tryptophan, and brain serotonin levels. 
These findings suggested that the production and release of serotonin in brai n neurons were 
normally coupled with blood -tryptophan increases. In later studies we found that injecting 
insulin into a rats bloodstream also caused parallel elevations in blood and brain tryptophan 
levels and in serotonin levels. We then decided to see whether the secretion of the animals own 
insulin similarly affected serotonin production. We gave the rats a carbohydrate -containing 
meal that we knew would elicit insulin secretion. As we had hypothesized, the blood tryptophan 
level and the concentration s of tryptophan serotonin in the brain increased after the meal.  
Surprisingly, however, when we added a large amount of protein to the meal, brain 
tryptophan and serotonin levels fell. Since protein contains tryptophan, why should it depress 
brain tryptoph an levels? The answer lies in the mechanism that provides blood tryptophan to 
the brain cells. This same mechanism also provides the brain cells with other amino acids found 
in protein, such as tyrosine and Leucine. The consumption of protein increases blo od 
concentration of the other amino acids much more, proportionately, than it does that of 
tryptophan. The more protein in the meal, the lower is the ratio of the resulting 
blood -tryptophan concentration to the concentration of competing amino acids, and t he more 
slowly is tryptophan provided to the brain. Thus the more protein in a meal, the less serotonin 
subsequently produced and released.  
1. Which of the following titles best summarizes the contents of the passage?  
(A) Neurotransmitters: Their Crucial F unction in Cellular Communication  
(B) Diet and Survival: An Old Relationship Reexamined  
(C) The Blood Supply and the Brain: A Reciprocal Dependence  
(D) Amino Acids and Neurotransmitters: The Connection Between Serotonin 
Levels and Tyrosine  108 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) The Effec ts of Food Intake on the Production and Release of Serotonin: Some 
Recent Findings  
2. According to the passage, the speed with which tryptophan is provided to the 
brain cells of a rat varies with the  
(A) amount of protein present in a meal  
(B) concentratio n of serotonin in the brain before a meal  
(C) concentration of leucine in the blood rather than on the concentration of 
tyrosine in the blood after a meal  
(D) concentration of tryptophan in the brain before a meal  
(E) number of serotonin -containing neurons present in the brain before a meal  
3. According to the passage, when the authors began their first studies, they were 
aware that  
(A) they would eventually need to design experiments that involved feeding rats 
high concentrations of protein  
(B) tryptophan levels in the blood were difficult to monitor with accuracy  
(C) serotonin levels increased after rats were fed meals rich in tryptophan  
(D) there were many neurotransmitters whose production was dependent on 
metabolic processes elsewhere in the body  
(E) serotonin levels increased after rats were injected with a large amount of 
tryptophan  
4. According to the passage, one reason that the authors gave rats carbohydrates was 
to 
(A) depress the rats tryptophan levels  
(B) prevent the rats from contract ing diseases  
(C) cause the rats to produce insulin  
(D) demonstrate that insulin is the most important substance secreted by the body  
(E) compare the effect of carbohydrates with the effect of proteins  
5. According to the passage, the more protein a rat consumes, the lower will be the  
(A) ratio of the rats blood -tryptophan concentration to the amount of serotonin 
produced and released in the rats brain  
(B) ratio of the rats blood -tryptophan concentration to the concentration in its 
blood of the other a mino acids contained in the protein  
(C) ratio of the rats blood -tyrosine concentration to its blood -leucine 
concentration  
(D) number of neurotransmitters of any kind that the rat will produce and release  
(E) number of amino acids the rats blood will contain  
6. The authors discussion of the mechanism that provides blood tryptophan to the 
brain cells (lines 31 -32) is meant to   GMAT  109 
 (A) stimulate further research studies  
(B) summarize an area of scientific investigation  
(C) help explain why a particular research finding was obtained  
(D) provide supporting evidence for a controversial scientific theory  
(E) refute the conclusions of a previously mentioned research study  
7. According to the passage, an injec tion of insulin was most similar in its effect on 
rats to an injection of  
(A) tyrosine  
(B) leucine  
(C) blood  
(D) tryptophan  
(E) protein  
8. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following would be LEAST 
likely to be a potential source of aid to a patient who was not adequately 
producing and releasing serotonin?  
(A) Meals consisting almost exclusively of protein  
(B) Meals consisting almost exclusively of carbohydrates  
(C) Meals that would elicit insulin secretion  
(D) Meals that had very low  concentrations of tyrosine  
(E) Meals that had very low concentrations of leucine  
9. It can be inferred from the passage that the authors initially held which of the 
following hypotheses about what would happen when they fed large amounts of 
protein to rats?  
(A) The rats brain s erotonin levels would not decrease.  
(B) The rats brain tryptophan levels would decrease . 
(C) The rats tyrosine levels would increase less quickly than would their leucine 
levels . 
(D) The rats would produce more insulin.  
(E) The rats would produce neur otransmitters other than serotonin.