Historians of womens labor in the United States at first largely disregarded the story of 126 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 female service workers women earning wages in occupations such as salesclerk , domestic 
servant, and office secretary. These historians focused instead on factory work, primarily 
becaus e it seemed so different from traditional, unpaid womens work in the home, and 
because the underlying economic forces of industrialism were presumed to be gender -blind and 
hence emancipatory in effect . Unfortunately, emancipation has been less profound than 
expected, for not even industrial wage labor has escaped continued sex segregation in the 
workplace.  
To explain this u nfinished revolution in the status of women, historians have recently 
begun to emphasize the way a prevailing definition of femininity often determines the kinds of 
work allocated to women, even when such allocation is inappropriate to new conditions. For 
instance, early textile -mill entrepreneurs, in justifying womens employment in wage labor, 
made much of the assumption that women were by nature  skillful at detailed tasks and patient 
in carrying out repetitive chores; the mill owners thus imported into the new industrial order 
hoary stereotypes associated with the homemaking activities they presumed to have been the 
purview of women. Because w omen accepted the more unattractive new industrial tasks more 
readily than did men, such jobs came to be regarded as female jobs. And employers, who 
assumed that womens real aspirations were for marriage and family life, declined to pay 
women wages comm ensurate with those of men. Thus many lower -skilled, lower -paid, less 
secure jobs came to be perceived as female.  
More remarkable than the origin has been the persistence of such sex segregation in 
twentieth -century industry. Once an occupation came to b e perceived as female. employers 
showed surprisingly little interest in changing that perception, even when higher profits 
beckoned. And despite the urgent need of the United States during the Second World War to 
mobilize its human resources fully, job s egregation by sex characterized even the most 
important war industries. Moreover, once the war ended, employers quickly returned to men 
most of the male jobs that women had been permitted to master.  
1. According to the passage, job segregation by sex in the United States was  
(A) greatly dimin ished by labor mobilization during the Second World War  
(B) perpetuated by those textile -mill owners who argued in favor of womens 
employment in wage labor  
(C) one means by which women achieved greater job security  
(D) reluctantly challenged by employers except when the economic advantages 
were obvious  
(E) a constant source of labor unrest in the young textile industry  
2. According to the passage, historians of womens labor focused on factory work as 
a more promising area of research than service -sector work because factory work  
(A) involved the pay ment of higher wages  
(B) required skill in detailed tasks  
(C) was assumed to be less characterized by sex segregation  
(D) was more readily accepted by women than by men  
(E) fitted the economic dynamic of industrialism better   GMAT  127 
 3. It can be inferred from t he passage that early historians of womens labor in the 
United States paid little attention to womens employment in the service sector of 
the economy because  
(A) the extreme variety of these occupations made it very difficult to assemble 
meaningful stati stics about them  
(B) fewer women found employment in the service sector than in factory work  
(C) the wages paid to workers in the service sector were much lower than those 
paid in the industrial sector  
(D) womens employment in the service sector tended to  be much more 
short -term than in factory work  
(E) employment in the service sector seemed to have much in common with the 
unpaid work associated with homemaking  
4. The passage supports which of the following statements about the early mill 
owners mentio ned in the second paragraph?  
(A) They hoped that by creating relatively unattractive female jobs they would 
discourage women from losing interest in marriage and family life.  
(B) They sought to increase the size of the available labor force as a means to  
keep mens wages low.  
(C) They argued that women were inherently suited to do well in particular kinds 
of factory work.  
(D) They thought that factory work bettered the condition of women by 
emancipating them from dependence on income earned by men.  
(E) They felt guilty about disturbing the traditional division of labor in family.  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that the unfinished revolution the author 
mentions in line 13 refers to the  
(A) entry of women into the industrial labor market  
(B) recognition that work done by women as homemakers should be compensated 
at rates comparable to those prevailing in the service sector of the economy  
(C) development of a new definition of femininity unrelated to the economic 
forces of industrialism  
(D) introduction of equal pay for equal work in all professions  
(E) emancipation of women wage earners from gender -determined job allocation  
6. The passage supports which of the following statements about hiring policies in 
the United States?  
(A) After a crisis many formerly male jobs are reclassified as female  jobs.  
(B) Industrial employers generally prefer to hire women with previous experience 
as homemakers.  
(C) Post -Second World War hiring policies caused women to lose many of their 
wartime gains in employment opportunity.  128 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) Even war industries during the Second World War were reluctant to hire 
women for factory work.  
(E) The service sector of the economy has proved more nearly gender -blind in its 
hiring policies than has the manufacturing sector.  
7. Which of the following words best expresses the opinion of the author of the 
passage concerning the notion that women  are more skillful than men in carrying 
out detailed tasks?  
(A) patient (line 21)  
(B) repetitive (line 21)  
(C) hoary (line 22)  
(D) homemaking (line 23)  
(E) purview (line 24)  
8. Which of the following best describes the relationship of the fina l paragraph to 
the passage as a whole?  
(A) The central idea is reinforced by the citation of evidence drawn from 
twentieth -century history.  
(B) The central idea is restated in such a way as to form a transition to a new 
topic for discussion.  
(C) The centra l idea is restated and juxtaposed with evidence that might appear to 
contradict it.  
(D) A partial exception to the generalizations of the central idea is dismissed as 
unimportant.  
(E) Recent history is cited to suggest that the central ideas validity is gradually 
diminishing.