The fact that superior service can generate a competitive advantage for a company does 
not mean that every attempt at improving service will cre ate such an advantage. Investments 
in service, like those in production and distribution, must be balanced against other types of 
investments on the basis of direct, tangible benefits such as cost reduction and increased 
revenues. If a company is already e ffectively on a par  with its competitors because it provides 
service that avoids a damaging reputation and keeps customers from leaving at an 
unacceptable rate, then investment in higher service levels may be wasted, since service is a 
deciding factor for customers only i n extreme situations.  
This truth was not apparent to managers of one regional bank , which failed to improve its 
competitive position despite its investment in reducing the time a customer had to wait for a 
teller. The bank  managers did not recognize the level of customer inertia in the consumer 
banking industry that arises from the inconvenience of switching banks. Nor did they analyze 
their service improvement to determine whether it would attract new customers by producin g a 
new standard of service that would excite customers or by proving difficult for competitors to 
copy. The only merit of the improvement was that it could easily be described to customers.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) contrast possible  outcomes of a type of business investment  
(B) suggest more careful evaluation of a type of business investment  
(C) illustrate various ways in which a type of business investment could fail to 
enhance revenues  
(D) trace the general problems of a company to  a certain type of business 
investment  
(E) criticize the way in which managers tend to analyze the costs and benefits of 
business investments  
2. According to the passage, investments in service are comparable to investments 
in production and distribution in terms of the  
(A) tangibility of t he benefits that they tend to confer  
(B) increased revenues that they ultimately produce  
(C) basis on which they need to be weighed  
(D) insufficient analysis that managers devote to them  
(E) degree of competitive advantage that they are likely to provid e  GMAT  157 
 3. The passage suggests which of the following about service provided by the 
regional bank prior to its investment in enhancing that service?  
(A) It enabled the bank to retain customers at an acceptable rate . 
(B) It threatened to weaken the banks compet itive position with respect to other 
regional banks . 
(C) It had already been improved after having caused damage to the banks 
reputation in the past.  
(D) It was slightly superior to that of the banks regional competitors.  
(E) It needed to be improved to attain parity with the service provided by 
competing banks.  
4. The passage suggests that bank managers failed to consider whether or not the 
service improvement mentioned in line  19 
(A) was too complicated to be easily d escribed to prospective customers  
(B) made a measurable change in the experiences of customers in the banks 
offices  
(C) could be sustained if the number of customers increased significantly  
(D) was an innovation that competing banks could have imitated  
(E) was adequate to bring the banks general level of service to a level that was 
comparable with that of its competitors  
5. The discussion of the regional bank (line 13 -24) serves which of the following 
functions within the passage as a whole?  
(A) It des cribes an exceptional case in which investment in service actually failed 
to produce a competitive advantage.  
(B) It illustrates the pitfalls of choosing to invest in service at a time when 
investment is needed more urgently in another area.  
(C) It demonst rates the kind of analysis that managers apply when they choose 
one kind of service investment over another . 
(D) It supports the argument that investments in certain aspects of service are 
more advantageous than investments in other aspects of service.  
(E) It provides an example of the point about investment in service made in the 
first paragraph.  
6. The author uses the word only in line 23 most likely in order to  
(A) highlight the oddity of the service improvement  
(B) emphasize the relatively low valu e of the investment in service improvement  
(C) distinguish the primary attribute of the service improvement from secondary 
attributes  
(D) single out a certain merit of the service improvement from other merits  
(E) point out the limited duration of the actual service improvement  158 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
  GMAT 22Passages