It was once assumed that all living things could be divided into two fundamental and 
exhaustive categories. Multicellular plants and animals, as well as many unicellular organisms, 
are eukaryotic their large, complex cells  have a well -formed nucleus and many organelles. On 
the other hand, the true bacteria are prokaryotic cell , which are simple and lack a nucleus. The 
distinction between eukaryotes and bacteria, initially defined in terms of subcellular structures 
visible with a microscope, was ultimately carried to the molecular level. Here prokaryotic and 
eukaryotic cell s have many features in common. For instance, they translate genetic 
information into proteins according to the same type of genetic coding. But even where the 
molecular processes are the same, the details in the two forms are different and characteristic  GMAT  115 
 of the respective forms. For example, the amino acid sequences of various enzymes tend to be 
typically prokaryotic or eukaryotic. The differences between the groups and the similarities 
within each group made it seem certain to most biologists that the tre e of life had only two 
stems. Moreover, arguments pointing out the extent of both structural and functional 
differences between eukaryotes and true bacteria convinced many biologists that the 
precursors of the eukaryotes must have diverged from the common ancestor before the 
bacteria arose.  
Although much of this picture has been sustained by more recent research, it seems 
fundamentally wrong in one respect. Among the bacteria, there are organisms that are 
significantly different both from the cells of eukar yotes and from the true bacteria, and it now 
appears that there are three stems in the tree of life. New techniques for determining the 
molecular sequence of the RNA of organisms have produced evolutionary information about the 
degree to which organisms ar e related, the time since they diverged from a common ancestor, 
and the reconstruction of ancestral versions of genes. These techniques have strongly 
suggested that although the true bacteria indeed form a large coherent group, certain other 
bacteria, the archaebacteria , which are also prokaryotes and which resemble true bacteria, 
represent a distinct evolutionary branch that far antedates the common ancestor of all true 
bacteria.  
1. The pas sage is primarily concerned with  
(A) detailing the evidence that has led most biologists to replace the trichotomous 
picture of living organisms with a dichotomous one  
(B) outlining the factors that have contributed to the current hypothesis 
concerning the  number of basic categories of living organisms  
(C) evaluating experiments that have resulted in proof that the prokaryotes are 
more ancient than had been expected  
(D) summarizing the differences in structure and function found among true 
bacteria, archaeb acteria, and eukaryotes  
(E) formulating a hypothesis about the mechanisms of evolution that resulted in 
the ancestors of the prokaryotes  
2. According to the passage, investigations of eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells at the 
molecular level supported the  conclusion that  
(A) most eukaryotic organisms are unicellular  
(B) complex cells have well -formed nuclei  
(C) prokaryotes and eukaryotes form two fundamental categories  
(D) subcellular structures are visible with a microscope  
(E) prokaryotic and eukaryot ic cells have similar enzymes  
3. According to the passage, which of the following statements about the 
two-category hypothesis is likely to be true?  
(A) It is promising because it explains the presence of true bacteria -like 
organisms such as organelles in eukaryotic cells.  116 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) It is promising because it explains why eukaryotic cells, unlike prokaryotic 
cells, tend to form multicellular organisms.  
(C) It is flawed because it fails to account for the great variety among eukaryotic 
organisms.  
(D) It is flawed because it fails to account for the similarity between prokaryotes 
and eukaryotes.  
(E) It is flawed because it fails to recognize an important distinction among 
prokaryotes.  
4. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following have recentl y been 
compared in order to clarify the fundamental classifications of living things?  
(A) The genetic coding in true bacteria and that in other prokaryotes  
(B) The organelle structures of archaebacteria, true bacteria, and eukaryotes  
(C) The cellular struc tures of multicellular organisms and unicellular organisms  
(D) The molecular sequences in eukaryotic RNA, true bacterial RNA, and 
archaebacterial RNA  
(E) The amino acid sequences in enzymes of various eukaryotic species and those 
of enzymes in archaebacterial species  
5. If the new techniques mentioned in line 31 were applied in studies of biological 
classifications other than bacteria, which of th e following is most likely?  
(A) Some of those classifications will have to be reevaluated.  
(B) Many species of bacteria will be reclassified . 
(C) It will be determined that there are four main categories of living things rather 
than three.  
(D) It will be f ound that true bacteria are much older than eukaryotes.  
(E) It will be found that there is a common ancestor of the eukaryotes, 
archaebacteria, and true bacteria.  
6. According to the passage, researchers working under the two -category hypothesis 
were correct in thinking that  
(A) prokaryotes form a coherent group  
(B) the common ancestor of all living things had complex properties  
(C) eukaryotes are fundamentally different from true bacteria  
(D) true bacteria are just as complex as eukaryotes  
(E) ancestral versions of eukaryotic genes functioned differently  from their 
modern counterparts  
7. All of the following statements are supported by the passage EXCEPT:  
(A) True bacteria form a distinct evolutionary group.  
(B) Archaebacteria are prokaryotes that resemble true bacteria.  
(C) True bacteria and eukaryotes e mploy similar types of genetic coding.   GMAT  117 
 (D) True bacteria and eukaryotes are distinguishable at the subcellular level.  
(E) Amino acid sequences of enzymes are uniform for eukaryotic and prokaryotic 
organisms.  
8. The authors attitude toward the view that living things are divided into three 
categories is best described as one of  
(A) tentative acceptance  
(B) mild skepti cism  
(C) limited denial  
(D) studious criticism  
(E) whole hearted endorsement