In Forces o f Production , David Noble examines the transformation of the machine -tool 
industry as the industry moved from reliance on skilled artisans to automation. Noble writes 
from a Marxist perspective, and his central argument is that management, in its decisions  to 
automate, conspired against labor: the power that the skilled machinists wielded in the industry  GMAT  101 
 was intolerable to management. Noble fails to substantiate this claim, although his argument is 
impressive when he applies the Marxist concept of de -skillingthe use of technology to 
replace skilled labor to the automation of the machine -tool industry. In automating, the 
industry moved to computer -based, digitized numerical -control (N/C) technology, rather than 
to artisan -generated record -playback (R/P ) technology.  
Although both systems reduced reliance on skilled labor, Noble clearly prefers R/P, with its 
inherent acknowledgment of workers skills: unlike N/C, its programs were produced not by 
engineers at their computers, but by skilled machinists, wh o recorded their own movements to 
teach machines to duplicate those movements. However, Nobles only evidence of conspiracy 
is that, although the two approaches were roughly equal in technical merit, management chose 
N/C. From this he concludes that auto mation is undertaken not because efficiency demands it 
or scientific advances allow it, but because it is a tool in the ceaseless war of capitalists against 
labor.  
1. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) reexamining a political positio n and defending its validity  
(B) examining a management decision and defending its necessity  
(C) analyzing a scholarly study and pointing out a central weakness  
(D) explaining a trend in automation and warning about its dangers  
(E) chronicling the histo ry of an industry and criticizing its development  
2. According to information in the passage, the term de -skilling refers to the  
(A) loss of skills to industry when skilled workers are replaced by unskilled 
laborers  
(B) substitution of mechanized process es for labor formerly performed by skilled 
workers  
(C) labor theory that automation is technologically comparable to skilled labor  
(D) process by which skilled machinists teach machines to perform certain 
tasks  
(E) exclusion of skilled workers from participation in the development of 
automated technology  
3. Which of the following best characterizes the function of the second paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) It develops a topic introduced in the first paragraph.  
(B) It provides evidence to refute a claim presented in the first paragraph.  
(C) It gives examples of a phenomenon mentioned in the first paragraph.  
(D) It presents a generalization about examples given in the first paragraph.  
(E) It suggests two possib le solutions to a problem presented in the first 
paragraph.  
4. The passage suggests which of the following about N /C automation in the 
machine -tool industry?  102 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) It displaced fewer skilled workers than R/P automation did.  
(B) It could have been implemented  either by experienced machinists or by 
computer engineers.  
(C) It was designed without the active involvement skilled machinists.  
(D) It was more difficult to design than R/P automation was.  
(E) It was technically superior to R/P automation.  
5. Which of the following phrases most clearly reveals the attitude of the author of 
the passage toward Nobles central argument?  
(A) conspired against (line 6)  
(B) intolerable to management (line 7) 
(C) impressive when he applies the Marxist concept (line 9)  
(D) clearly prefers (line 16)  
(E) only evidence of conspiracy (line 21)  
6. The author of the passage commends Nobles book for which of the following?  
(A) Concentrating on sk illed as opposed to unskilled workers in its discussion of 
the machine -tool industry  
(B) Offering a generalization about the motives behind the machine -tool 
industrys decision to automate  
(C) Making an essential distinction between two kinds of technology  employed in 
the machine -tool industry  
(D) Calling into question the notion that managers conspired against labor in the 
automation of the machine -tool industry  
(E) Applying the concept of de -skilling to the machine  tool industry  
7. Which of the following best characterizes Forces of Production as it is described 
in the passage?  
(A) A comparison of two interpretations of how a particular industry evolved  
(B) A n examination of the origin of a particular concept in industrial economics  
(C) A study that points out the weakness of a particular interpretation of an 
industrial phenomenon  
(D) A history of a particular industry from an ideological point of view  
(E) An attempt to relate an industrial phenomenon in one industry to a similar 
phenomenon in another industry