Bernard Bailyn has recently reinterpreted the early history of the United State s by applying 
new social research findings on the experiences of European migrants. In his reinterpretation, 
migration becomes the organizing principle for rewriting the history of preindustrial North 
America. His approach rests on four separate propositio ns.  GMAT  57 
 The first of these asserts that residents of early modern England moved regularly about 
their countryside; migrating to the New World was simply a natural spillover. Although at first 
the colonies held little positive attraction for the English they would rather have stayed 
home by the eighteenth century people increasingly migrated to America because they 
regarded it as the land of opportunity. Secondly, Bailyn holds that, contrary to the notion that 
used to flourish in America history textbooks, the re was never a typical New World community. 
For example, the economic and demographic character of early New England towns varied 
considerably.  
Bailyns third proposition suggests two general patterns prevailing among the many 
thousands of migrants: one gr oup came as indentured servants, another came to acquire land. 
Surprisingly, Bailyn suggests that those who recruited indentured servants were the driving 
forces of transatlantic migration. These colonial entrepreneurs helped determine the social 
character  of people who came to preindustrial North America. At first, thousands of unskilled 
laborers were recruited; by the 1730s, however, American employers demanded skilled 
artisans.  
Finally, Bailyn argues that the colonies were a half -civilized hinterland of  the European 
culture system. He is undoubtedly correct to insist that the colonies were part of an 
Anglo -American empire. But to divide the empire into English core and colonial periphery, as 
Bailyn does, devalues the achievements of colonial culture. It is true, as Bailyn claims, that high 
culture in the colonies never matched that in England. But what of  seventeenth -century New 
England, where the settlers created eff ective laws, built a distinguished university, and 
published books? Bailyn might respond that New England was exceptional. However, the ideas 
and institutions developed by New England Puritans had powerful effects on North American 
culture.  
Although Bailyn  goes on to apply his approach to some thousands of indentured servants 
who migrated just prior to the revolution, he fails to link their experience with the political 
development of the United States. Evidence presented in his work suggests how we might 
make such a connection. These indentured servants were treated as slaves for the period 
during which they had sold their time to American employers. It is not surprising that as soon as 
they served their time they passed up  good wages in th e cities and headed west to ensure their 
personal independence by acquiring land. Thus, it is in the west that a peculiarly American 
political culture began, among colonists who were suspicious of authority and intensely 
anti-aristocratic.  
1. Which of the following statements about migrants to colonial North America is 
supported by information in the passage?  
(A) A larger percentage of migrants to colonial North America came as 
indentured servants than as free agents interested in acquiring land.  
(B) Migran ts who came to the colonies as indentured servants were more 
successful at making a livelihood than were farmers and artisans.  
(C) Migrants to colonial North America were more successful at acquiring their 
own land during the eighteenth century than during  the seven -tenth century.  
(D) By the 1730s, migrants already skilled in a trade were in more demand by 58 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 American employers than were unskilled laborers.  
(E) A significant percentage of migrants who came to the colonies to acquire land 
were forced to work as field hands for prosperous American farmers.  
2. The author of the passage states that Bailyn failed to  
(A) give sufficient emphasis to the cultural  and political interdependence of the 
colonies and England  
(B) describe carefully how migrants of different ethnic backgrounds preserved 
their culture in the united States  
(C) take advantage of social research on the experiences of colonists who 
migrated t o colonial North America specifically to acquire land  
(D) relate the experience of the migrants to the political values that eventually 
shaped the character of the United States  
(E) investigate the lives of Europeans before they came to colonial North America 
to determine more adequately their motivations for migrating  
3. Which of the following best summarizes the authors evaluation of Bailyns 
fourth proposition?  
(A) It is t otally implausible.  
(B) It is partially correct.  
(C) It is highly admirable.  
(D) It is controversial though persuasive.  
(E) It is intriguing though unsubstantiated.  
4. According to the passage, Bailyn and the author agree on which of the following 
statements about the culture of colonial New England?  
(A) High culture in New England never equaled the high culture of England.  
(B) The cultural achievements of colonial New England have generally been 
unrecognized by historians.  
(C) The colonists imitated the  high culture of England, and did not develop a 
culture that was uniquely their own.  
(D) The southern colonies were greatly influenced by the high culture of New 
England.  
(E) New England communities were able to create laws and build a university, 
but unable to create anything innovative in the arts.  
5. According to the passage, which of the following is true of English migrants to 
the colonies during the eighteenth cen tury?  
(A) Most of them were farmers rather than trades people or artisans.  
(B) Most of them came because they were unable to find work in England.  
(C) They differed from other English people in that they were willing to travel.  
(D) They expected that the c olonies would offer them increased opportunity.   GMAT  59 
 (E) They were generally not as educated as the people who remained in England.  
6. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) comparing several current interpretations of early American history  
(B) suggesting that new social research on m igration should lead to revisions in 
current interpretations of early American history  
(C) providing the theoretical framework that is used by most historians in 
understanding early American history  
(D) refuting an argument about early American history tha t has been proposed by 
social historians  
(E) discussing a reinterpretation of early American history that is based on new 
social research on migration  
7. It can be inferred from the passage that American history textbooks used to assert 
that 
(A) many migrants to colonial North America were no t successful financially  
(B) more migrants came to America out of religious or political conviction that 
came in the hope of acquiring land  
(C) New England communities were much alike in terms of their economics and 
demographics  
(D) many migrants to coloni al North America failed to maintain ties with their 
European relations  
(E) the level of literacy in New England communities was very high  
8. The author of the passage would be most likely to agree with which of the 
following statements about Bailyns work?  
(A) Bailyn underestimates the effects of Puritan thought on North American 
culture . 
(B) Bailyn overemphasizes the economic dependence of the colonies on Great 
Britain.  
(C) Bailyns description of the colonies as part of an Anglo -American empire is 
misleading and incorrect.  
(D) Bailyn failed to test his propositions on a specific group of migrants to 
colonial North America.  
(E) Bailyn overemphasizes the experiences of migrants to the New England 
colonies, and neglects the southern and the western parts of the New World.