For over 300 years, one of the most enduring beliefs among historians of England has been 
that the characte r of English society has been shaped by the unique openness of its ruling elite 
to entry by self -made entrepreneurs (especially newly wealthy merchants) able to buy their way 
into the ranks of elite society. This upward mobility , historians have argued, allowed England to 
escape the clash between those with social/political power and those with economic power, a 
conflict that beset the rest of Europe during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Upward 
mobility was also used t o explain England s exceptional stability since the late seventeenth 
century (no revolutions, for example), as well as such major events as the development of the 
most efficient agricultural system in Europe, the making of the first industrial revolution, and 
the onset of severe economic decline.  
But is the thesis true? Recent work on the supposed consequences of an open elite has 
already produced some doubts. Little credence, for example, is now accorded the idea that 
England s late nineteenth -century econ omic decline resulted from absentee business owners 
too distracted by the demands of elite life to manage their firms properly. But, although the 
importance of an open elite to other major events has been severely questioned, it is only with 
a new work by Lawrence and Jeanne Stone that the openness itself has been confronted. 
Eschewing the tack of tracing the careers of successful entrepreneurs to gauge the openness of 
the elite, the Stones chose the alternative approach of analyzing the elite itself, and proceeded 
via the ingenious route of investigating country -house ownershi p. 
Arguing that ownership of a country house was seen as essential for membership in the 
ruling elite, the Stones analyze the nature of country -house ownership in three counties for the 
period 1540 -1880. Their critical findings are provocative: there was s trikingly little change in 
the ownership of such houses throughout the period. Instead, even in the face of a 
demographic crisis (fewer marriages, declining fertility, rising infant mortality), the old elite was 
able to maintain itself, and its estates, in tact for centuries through recourse to various marriage 
and inheritance strategies. The popular picture of venerable elite families overcome by debt 
and selling out to merchants is simply not borne out  by the Stones  findings. Rather, the 
opportunities for entrepreneurs to buy their way into the elite, the Stones show, were 
extremely limited. If further studies of country -house ownership attest to  the 
representativeness and accu racy of their data, then the Stones  conclusion that the open elite 
thesis cannot be maintained may, indeed, prove true.  
1. According to the passage, one of the traditional explanations of England s late 
nineteenth -century economic decline has been that it  resulted from the  204 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) tendency of the ruling elite to pursue conservative rather than innovative 
economic policies  
(B) failure of business entrepreneurs to reduce the power of the ruling elite in 
English society  
(C) investment of large amounts of capital in the purchase and maintenance of 
country houses  
(D) tendency of business owners to attempt to retain control of their firms within 
their families  
(E) failure of leading business entrepreneurs to pay close attention to their firms  
2. The author suggest s that which of the following was true of most European elites 
during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries?  
(A) The ranks of these elites were generally closed to most business 
entrepreneurs.  
(B) The elites generally dominated industrial development.  
(C) Status within these elites was generally determined by the amount of  land 
owned.  
(D) These elites generally were able to maintain their power unchallenged.  
(E) The power of these elites generally forestalled the development of a large 
class of self -made entrepreneurs.  
3. Traditional historians of England, as they are described in the passage, would be 
most likely to agree with which of the following state ments regarding open 
elites?  
(A) They develop more easily in agricultural rather than industrial societies.  
(B) They develop in response to particular sets of economic conditions.  
(C) They tend to unite some of the powerful groups in a society.  
(D) They te nd to reduce class distinctions based on income in a society.  
(E) They tend to insure adequate distribution of material goods in a society.  
4. The tone of the passage suggests that the author regards the Stones  
methodological approach as  
(A) problematic  
(B) difficult  
(C) controversial  
(D) rigorous  
(E) clever  
5. Which of the following best states the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Assumptions about the nature of England s ruling elite can no longer be used 
with certitude to explain many major economic developments.  
(B) The concept of the open elite i s of paramount importance in explaining major  GMAT  205 
 English political, social, and economic events.  
(C) The long -standing belief that England possessed a remarkably open ruling 
elite has recently been subjected to important and potentially lethal criticism.  
(D) Although many possibilities are available, the most reliable means of testing 
the truth of the open elite  hypothesis is to analyze changes in the 
composition of the elite.  
(E) An analysis of English country -house ownership in England indicates that 
there were few opportunities for merchants to buy the estates of old 
members of the  landed elite.  
6. Which of the following can be inferred from the Stones  findings about English 
country -house ownership in the three counties during the period 1540 -1880?  
(A) Little change in the number or size of English country houses occurred during 
this period.  
(B) Wealthy business owners constituted a growing percentage of English 
country -house owners during this period.  
(C) Most of the families that owned country houses at the beginning of this period 
continued to own them at the end.  
(D) The most significant changes in English country -house ownership occurred 
during the second half of this period.  
(E) Self -made entrepreneurs were able to enter the ranks of the English  
country -house owners during this period only through marriage.  
7. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) resolve a debate between two schools of thought.  
(B) Present research that questions an established view.  
(C) Describe and criticize a new appro ach. 
(D) Defend a traditional interpretation against recent criticisms.  
(E) Analyze possible approaches to resolving a long -standing controversy.  
8. The Stones suggest that major problems facing the English elite during the period 
1540 -1880 included which of the following?  
I. A reduction in the number of their offspring  
II. An increase in the amount of their indebtedness  
III. A decline in their political and social power  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
9. The author suggests that the Stones  conclusions about the openness of the 206 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 English elite would be strengthened by future studies that  
(A) pay more attention to other recent historical works  
(B) include more data on factors other than country -house ownership  
(C) concentrate more on the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries  
(D) expand the area of research to include more counties  
(E) focus more on successful business entrepreneurs