The uniqueness of the Japanese character is the result of two seemingly contradictory 
forces: the strength of traditions and selective receptivity to foreign achievements and 
inventions. As early as the 1860s, there were count er movements to the traditional orientation. 
Yukichi Fukuzawa, the most eloquent spokesman of Japan s Enlightenment,  claimed: The 
Confucian civilization of the East seems to me to lack two things possessed by Western 
civilization: science in the materia l sphere and a sense of independence in the spiritual sphere.  
Fukuzawa s great influence is found in the free and individualistic philosophy of the Education 
Code of 1872, but he was not able to prevent the government from turning back to the canons 
of Confucian thought in the Imperial Rescript  of 1890. Another interlude of relative liberalism 
followed World War I, when the democratic idealism of President Woodrow Wilson had an 
important impact on Japanese intellectuals and, especially students: but more i mportant was 
the Leninist ideology of the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution. Again in the early 1930s, nationalism 
and militarism became dominant, largely as a result of failing economic conditions.  
Following the end of World War II, substantial changes were under taken in Japan to 
liberate the individual from authoritarian restraints. The new democratic value system was 
accepted by many teachers, students, intellectuals, and old liberals, but it was not immediately 
embraced by the society as a whole. Japanese tradi tions were dominated by group values, and 
notions of personal freedom and individual rights were unfamiliar.  
Today, democratic processes are clearly evident in the widespread participation of the 
Japanese people in social and political life: yet, there is no universally accepted and stable value 
system. Values are constantly modified by strong infusions of Western ideas, both democratic 
and Marxist. School textbooks expound democratic principles, emphasizing equality over 
hierarchy  and rationalism over trad ition; but in practice these values are often misinterpreted 
and distorted, particularly by the youth who translate the individualistic and humanistic goals of 
democracy into egoistic and materialistic ones.  
Most Japanese people have consciously rejected C onfucianism, but vestiges of the old 
order remain. An important feature of relationships in many institutions such as political parties, 
large corporations, and university faculties is the oyabun -kobun  or parent -child relation. A party 
leader, supervisor, or professor, in return for loyalty, protects those subordinate to him and takes 
general responsibility for their interests throughout their entire lives, an obligation that  GMAT  169 
 sometimes even extends to arranging marriages. The corresponding loyalty of the in dividual to 
his patron reinforces his allegiance to the group to which they both belong. A willingness to 
cooperate with other members of the group and to  support without qualification the interests of 
the group in all its external relations is still a wid ely respected virtue. The oyabun -kobun  creates 
ladders of mobility which an individual can ascend, rising as far as abilities permit, so long as he 
maintains successful personal ties with a  superior in the vertical channel, the latter requirement 
usually t aking precedence over a need for exceptional competence. As a consequence, there is 
little horizontal relationship between people even within the same profession.  
1. The author is mainly concerned with  
(A) explaining the influence of Confucianism on modern  Japan  
(B) analyzing the reasons for Japan s postwar economic success  
(C) discussing some important determinants of Japanese values  
(D) describing managerial practices in Japanese industry  
(E) contrasting modern with prewar Japanese society  
2. Which of the following is most like the relationship of the oyabun -kobun  
described in the passage?  
(A) A political candidate and the voting public  
(B) A gifted scientist and his protégé  
(C) Two brothers who are partners in a business  
(D) A judge presiding at the tr ial of a criminal defendant  
(E) A leader of a musical ensemble who is also a musician in the group  
3. According to the passage, Japanese attitudes are influenced by which of the 
following?  
I. Democratic ideals  
II. Elements of modern Western culture  
III. Remnants of an earlier soc ial structure  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
4. The author implies that  
(A) decisions about promotions are often based on personal feelings  
(B) students and intellectuals do not understand the basic tenet s of Western 
democracy  
(C) Western values have completely overwhelmed traditional Japanese attitudes  
(D) respect for authority was introduced into Japan following World War II  
(E) most Japanese workers are members of a single political party  170 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 5. In devel oping the passage, the author does which of the following?  
(A) Introduce an analogy  
(B) Define a term  
(C) Present statistics  
(D) Cite an authority  
(E) Issue a challenge  
6. It can be inferred that the Imperial Rescript of 1890  
(A) was a protest by libera ls against the lack of individual liberty in Japan  
(B) marked a return in government policies to conservative values  
(C) implemented the ideals set forth in the Education Code  of 1872  
(D) was influenced by the Leninist ideology of the Bolshevik Revolution  
(E) prohibited the teaching of Western ideas in Japanese schools  
7. Which of the following is the most accurate description of the organization of the 
passage?  
(A) A sequence of inferences in which the conclusion of each successive step 
becomes a premis e in the next argument  
(B) A list of generalizations, most of which are supported by only a single 
example  
(C) A chronological analysis of historical events leading up to a description of the 
current situation  
(D) A statement of a commonly accepted theory that is then subjected to a critical 
analysis  
(E) An introduction of a key term that is then defined by giving examples  
8. Which of the following best states the central thesis of the passage?  
(A) The value system of Japan is based upon traditional and conservative values 
that have, in modern time s, been modified by Western and other liberal 
values.  
(B) Students and radicals in Japan have Leninist ideology to distort the meaning 
of democratic, Western values.  
(C) The notions of personal freedom and individual liberty did not find immediate 
acceptan ce in Japan because of the predominance of traditional group 
values.  
(D) Modern Japanese society is characterized by hierarchical relationships in 
which a personal tie to a superior is often more important than merit.  
(E) The influence on Japanese values of the American ideals of personal freedom 
and individual rights is less important than the influence of Leninist 
ideology.  
9. The tone of the passage can best be described as   GMAT  171 
 (A) neutral and objective  
(B) disparagi ng and flippant  
(C) critical and demanding  
(D) enthusiastic and supportive  
(E) skeptical and questioning