Homeostasis, an animals maintenance of certain internal variables within an acceptable 
range, particularly in  extreme physical environments, has long interested biologists. The desert 
rat and the camel in the most water -deprived environments, and marine vertebrates in an 
all-water environment, encounter the same regulatory problem: maintaining adequate internal 
fluid balance.  
For desert rats and camels, the problem is conservation of water in an environment where 
standing water is nonexistent, temperature is high, and humidity is low. Despite these 
handicaps, desert rats are able to maintain the osmotic pressure o f their blood, as well as their 
total bo dy-water content, at approximately the same levels as other rats. One countermeasure 
is behavioral: these rats stay in burrows during the hot part of the day, thus avoiding loss of 282 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 fluid through panting or sweating, which are regulatory mechanisms for maintaining internal 
body temperature by evaporative cooling . Also, desert rats kidneys can excrete a urine having 
twice as high a salt content as sea water.  
Camels, on the other hand, rely more on simple endurance. They cannot store water , and 
their reliance on an entirely unexceptional kidney results in a r ate of water loss through renal 
function significantly higher than that of desert rats. As a result, camels must tolerate losses in 
body water of up to thirty percent of their body weight. Nevertheless , camels do rely on a 
special mechanism to keep water l oss within a tolerable range: by seating and panting only 
when their body temperature exceeds that which would kill a human, they conserve internal 
water.  
Marine vertebrates experience difficulty with their water balance because though there is 
no shortage  of seawater to drink, they must drink a lot of it to maintain their internal fluid 
balance.  But the excess salts from the seawater must be discharged somehow, and the kidneys 
of most marine vertebrates are unable to excrete a urine in which the salts are more 
concentrated than in seawater. Most of these animals have special salt -secreting organs outside 
the kidney that enable them to eliminate excess salt.  
261. Which of the following most accurately states the purpose of the passage?  
(A) To compare two dif ferent approaches to the study of homeostasis  
(B) To summarize the findings of several studies regarding organisms 
maintenance of internal variables in extreme environments  
(C) To argue for a particular hypothesis regarding various organisms 
conservation  of water in desert environments  
(D) To cite examples of how homeostasis is achieved by various organisms  
(E) To defend a new theory regarding the maintenance of adequate fluid balance  
262. According to the passage, the camel maintains internal fluid balance in which of 
the following ways?  
I. By behavioral avoidance of exposure to conditions that lead to f luid loss  
II. By an ability to tolerate high body temperatures  
III. By reliance on stored internal fluid supplies  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
263. It can be inferred from the passage that some mechanis ms that regulate internal 
body temperature, like sweating and panting, can lead to which of the following?  
(A) A rise in the external body temperature  
(B) A drop in the bodys internal fluid level  
(C) A decrease in the osmotic pressure of the blood   GMAT  283 
 (D) A d ecrease in the amount of renal water loss  
(E) A decrease in the urines salt content  
264. It can be inferred from the passage that the author characterizes the camels 
kidney as entirely unexceptional (line 24) primarily to emphasize that it  
(A) functions much as the kidney of a rat function s 
(B) does not aid the camel in coping with the exceptional water loss resulting 
from the extreme conditions of its environment  
(C) does not enable the camel to excrete as much salt as do the kidneys of marine 
vertebrates  
(D) is similar in structure to the  kidneys of most mammals living in 
water -deprived environments  
(E) requires the help of other organs in eliminating excess salt