Studies of the Weddell seal in the laboratory have described the physiological mechanisms 
that allow the seal to cope with the extreme oxy gen deprivation that occurs during its longest 
dives, which can extend 5 00 meters below the oceans surface and last for over  70 minutes. 
Recent field studies, however, suggest that during more typical dives in the wild, this seals 
physiological behavior is different.  
In the laboratory, when the seal dives below the surface of the water and stops breathing, 
its heart beats more slowly, requiring less oxygen, and its arteries become constricted, ensuring 
that the seals blood remains concentrated near those  organs most crucial to its ability to 
navigate underwater. The seal essentially shuts off the flow of blood to other organs, which 
either stop functioning until the seal surfaces or switch to an anaerobic (oxygen -independent) 
metabolism. The latter result s in the production of large amounts of lactic acid  which can 
adversely affect the pH of the seals blood , but since the anaerobic metabolism occurs only in 
those tissues which have been isolated from the seals blood supply, the lactic acid is released 
into the seals blood only after the seal surfaces , when the lungs, liver, and other organs quickly 
clear the acid from the seals bloodstream.  
Recent field studies, however, reveal that on dives in the wild, the seal usually heads 
directly for its prey and returns to the surface in less than twenty minut es. The absence of high 
levels of lactic acid in the seals blood after such dives suggests that during them, the seals 
organs do not resort to the anaerobic metabolism observed in the laboratory, but are supplied 
with oxygen from the blood. The seals lo nger excursions underwater, during which it appears 
to be either exploring distant routes or evading a predator, do evoke the diving response seen in 
the laboratory. But why do the seals laboratory dives always evoke this response, regardless of 
their len gth or depth? Some biologists speculate that because in laboratory dives the seal is 
forcibly submerged, it does not know how long it will remain underwater and so prepares for 
the worst.  
1. The passage provides information to support which of the followin g 
generalizations?  
(A) Observations of animals physiological behavior in the wild are not reliable 
unless verified by laboratory studies.  
(B) It is generally less difficult to observe the physiological behavior of an animal 
in the wild than in the laborat ory. 
(C) The level of lactic acid in an animals blood is likely to be higher when it is 
searching for prey than when it is evading predators.  
(D) The level of lactic acid in an animals blood is likely to be lowest during 
those periods in which it experie nces oxygen deprivation.  
(E) The physiological behavior of animals in a laboratory setting is not always 
consistent with their physiological behavior in the wild.   GMAT  79 
 2. It can be inferred from the passage that by describing the Weddell seal as 
preparing f or the worst (line 41), biologists mean that it  
(A) prepares to remain underwater for no longer than twenty minutes  
(B) exhibits physiological behavior similar to that which characterizes dives in 
which it heads directly for its prey  
(C) exhibits physiolo gical behavior similar to that which characterizes its longest 
dives in the wild  
(D) begins to exhibit predatory behavior  
(E) clears the lactic acid from its blood before attempting to dive  
3. The passage suggests that during laboratory dives, the pH of the Weddell seals 
blood is not adversely affected by the production of lactic acid because  
(A) only those organs that a re essential to the seals ability to navigate underwater 
revert to an anaerobic mechanism  
(B) the seal typically reverts to an anaerobic metabolism only at the very end of 
the dive  
(C) organs that revert to an anaerobic metabolism are temporarily isolated  from 
the seals bloodstream  
(D) oxygen continues to be supplied to organs that clear lactic acid from the seals 
bloodstream  
(E) the seal remains submerged for only short periods of time  
4. Which of the following best summarizes the main point of the passage?  
(A) Recent field studies have indicated that descriptions of the physiological 
behavior of the Weddell seal during la boratory dives are not applicable to its 
most typical dives in the wild.  
(B) The Weddell seal has developed a number of unique mechanisms that enable 
it to remain submerged at depths of up to 500 meters for up to 70 minutes.  
(C) The results of recent field  studies have made it necessary for biologists to 
revise previous perceptions of how the Weddell seal behaves physiologically 
during its longest dives in the wild.  
(D) Biologists speculate that laboratory studies of the physiological behavior of 
seals duri ng dives lasting more than twenty minutes would be more accurate 
if the seals were not forcibly submerged.  
(E) How the Weddell seal responds to oxygen deprivation during its longest dives 
appears to depend on whether the seal is searching for prey or av oiding 
predators during such dives.  
5. According to the author, which of the following is true of the laboratory studies 
mentioned in line 1 ? 
(A) They fail to explain how the seal is able to tolerate the increased producti on 
of lactic acid by organs that revert to an anaerobic metabolism during its 
longest dives in the wild.  80 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) They present an oversimplified account of mechanisms that the Weddell seal 
relies on during its longest dives in the wild.  
(C) They provide evidenc e that undermines the view that the Weddell seal relies 
on an anaerobic metabolism during its most typical dives in the wild.  
(D) They are based on the assumption that Weddell seals rarely spend more than 
twenty minutes underwater on a typical dive in the wild.  
(E) They provide an accurate account of the physiological behavior of Weddell 
seals during those dives in the wild in which they are either evading 
predators or exploring distant routes.  
6. The author cites which of the following as characteristic  of the Weddell seals 
physiological behavior during dives observed in the laboratory?  
I. A decrease in the rate at which the seals heart beats  
II. A constriction of the seals arteries  
III. A decrease in the levels of lactic acid in the seals blood  
IV . A temporary halt in the functioning of certain organs  
(A) I and  III only 
(B) II and IV only 
(C) II and III only 
(D) I, II, and IV only 
(E) I, III, and IV only 
7. The passage suggests that because Weddell seals are forcibly submerged during 
laboratory dives, they do which of the following?  
(A) Exhibit the physiological responses that are characteristic of dives in the wild 
that last le ss than twenty minutes.  
(B) Exhibit the physiological responses that are characteristic of the longer dives 
they undertake in the wild.  
(C) Cope with oxygen deprivation less effectively than they do on typical dives in 
the wild.  
(D) Produce smaller amounts  of lactic acid than they do on typical dives in the 
wild.  
(E) Navigate less effectively than they do on typical dives in the wild .