
My objective is to analyze  certain forms of knowledge, not in terms of repression or law, 
but in terms of power. But the word power is apt to lead to misunderstandings about the nature, 
form, and unity of power. By power, I do not mean a group of institutions and mechanisms that 
ensure the subservience of the citizenry. I do not mean, either, a mode of subjugation that, in 
contrast to violence, has the form of the rule. Finally, I do not have in mind a general system of 
domination exerted by one group over another, a system whose ef fects, through successive 
derivations, pervade the entire social body. The sovereignty of the state, the form of law, or the 
overall unity of a domination are only the terminal forms power takes.  
It seems to me that power must be understood as the multipli city of force relations that are 
immanent in the social sphere; as the process that, through ceaseless struggle and 
confrontation, transforms, strengthens, or reverses them; as the support that these force 
relations find in one another, or on the contrary,  the disjunctions and contradictions that isolate 
them from one another; and lastly, as the strategies in which they take effect, whose general 
design or institutional crystallization is embodied in the state apparatus, in the formulation of 
the law, in th e various social hegemonies.  
Thus, the viewpoint that permits one to understand the exercise of power, even in its more 
peripheral effects, and that also makes it possible to use its mechanisms as a structural 
framework for analyzing the social order, mu st not be sought in a unique source of sovereignty 
from which secondary and descendent forms of power emanate but in the moving substrate of 
force relations that, by virtue of their inequality, constantly engender local and unstable states 
of power. If pow er seems omnipresent, it is not because it has the privilege of consolidating 
everything under its invincible unity, but because it is produced from one moment to the next, 
at every point, or rather in every relation from one point to another. Power is eve rywhere, not 
because it embraces everything, but because it comes from everywhere. And if power at times 
seems to be permanent, repetitious, inert, and self -reproducing, it is simply because the overall 
effect that emerges from all these mobilities is a co ncatenation that rests on each of them and 
seeks in turn to arrest their movement. One needs to be nominalistc, no doubt: power is not an 
institution, and not a structure; neither is it a certain strength we are endowed with; it is the 
name that one attrib utes to a complex strategic situation in a particular society.  
17. The authors primary purpose in defining power  is to 
(A) counteract self -serving and confusing uses of the term  
(B) establish a compromise among those who have defined the term in different  
ways  
(C) increase comprehension of the term by providing concrete examples  
(D) demonstrate how the meaning of the term has evolved  
(E) avoid possible misinterpretations resulting from the more common uses of the  GRE  311 
 term 
18. According to the passage, which of the following best describes the relationship 
between law and power?  
(A) Law is the protector of power.  
(B) Law is the source o f power.  
(C) Law sets bounds to power.  
(D) Law is a product of power.  
(E) Law is a stabilizer of power.  
19. Which of the following methods is NOT used extensively by the author in 
describing his own conception of power?  
(A) Restatement of central ideas  
(B) Provision of concrete examples  
(C) Analysis and classification  
(D) Comparison and contrast  
(E) Statement of cause and effect  
20. With which of the following statement would the author be most likely to agree?  
(A) Power tends to corrupt; absolute pow er corrupts absolutely.  
(B) The highest proof of virtue is to possess boundless power without abusing it.  
(C) To love knowledge is to love power.  
(D) It is from the people and their deeds that power springs.  
(E) The health of the people as a state is th e foundation on which all their power 
depends.  
21. The authors attitude toward the various kinds of compulsion employed by social 
institutions is best described as  
(A) concerned and sympathetic  
(B) scientific and detached  
(C) suspicious and cautious  
(D) reproachful and disturbed  
(E) meditative and wistful  
22. According to the passage, states of power are transient because of the  
(A) differing natures and directions of the forces that create them  
(B) rigid structural framework in which they operate  
(C) unique source from which they emanate  
(D) pervasive nature and complexity of the mechanisms by which they operate  
(E) concatenation that seeks to arrest their movement  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that the author believes the conflict among 312 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 social forces to be  
(A) essentially the same from one society to another even though its outward 
manifestation may seem different  
(B) usually the result of misunderstandings that impede social progress  
(C) an inevitable feature of the social order of any state  
(D) wrongly blamed fo r disrupting the stability of society  
(E) best moderated in states that possess a strong central government  
The hypothesis of an expanding Earth has never attracted notable support, and if it were 
not for the historical example of continental drift, such indifference might be a legitimate 
response to an apparently improbable concept. It should be remembered, however, that drift 
too was once regarded as illusory, but the idea was kept alive until evidence from physicists 
compelled geologists to reinterpret their data.  
Of course, it would be as dangerous to overreact to history by concluding that the majority 
must now be wrong about expansion as it would be to reenact the response that greeted the 
suggestion that the continents had drifted. The cases are not precisely analogous. There were 
serious problems with the pre -drift world view that a drift theory could help to resolve, whereas 
Earth expansion appears to offer no comparable advantages. If, however, physicists could show 
that the Earths gravitational force has decreased with time, expan sion would have to be 
reconsidered and accommodated.  
24. The passage indicates that one reason why the expansion hypothesis has attracted 
little support is that it will not  
(A) overcome deficiencies in current geologic hypotheses  
(B) clarify theories conce rning the Earths gravitational forces  
(C) complement the theory of continental drift  
(D) accommodate relevant theories from the field of physics  
(E) withstand criticism from scientists outside the field of geology  
25. The final acceptance of a drift th eory could best be used to support the argument 
that 
(A) physicists are reluctant to communicate with other scientists  
(B) improbable hypotheses usually turn out to be valid  
(C) there should be cooperation between different fields of science  
(D) there is a  need for governmental control of scientific research  
(E) scientific theories are often proved by accident  
26. In developing his argument, the author warns against  
(A) relying on incomplete measurements  
(B) introducing irrelevant information  
(C) rejecting corroborative evidence  
(D) accepting uninformed op inions   GRE  313 
 (E) making unwarranted comparisons  
27. It can be deduced from the passage that the gravitational force at a point on the 
Earths surface is  
(A) representative of the geologic age of the Earth  
(B) analogous to the movement of land masses  
(C) simil ar to optical phenomena such as mirages  
(D) proportional to the size of the Earth  
(E) dependent on the speed of the Earths rotation  