The number of wo men directors appointed to corporate boards in the United States has 
increased dramatically, but the ratio of female to male directors remains low. Although pressure 
to recruit women directors, unlike that to employ women in the general work force, does no t 
derive from legislation, it is nevertheless real.  
Although small companies were the first to have women directors, large corporations 
currently have a higher percentage of women on their boards. When the chairs of these large 
corporations began recruitin g women to serve on boards, they initially sought women who were 
chief executive officers (CEOs) of large corporations. However, such women CEOs are still rare. 
In addition, the ideal of six CEOs (female or male) serving on the board of each of the larg est 
corporations is realizable only if every CEO serves on six boards. This raises the specter of 
director over -commitment and the resultant dilution of contribution. Consequently, the chairs 
next sought women in business who had the equivalent of CEO expe rience. However, since it is 
only recently that large numbers of women have begun to rise in management, the chairs 
began to recruit women of high achievement outside the business world. Many such women are 
well known for their contributions in government,  education, and the nonprofit sector. The fact 
that the women from these sectors who were appointed were often acquaintances of the 
boards chairs seems quite reasonable: chairs have always considered it important for directors 
to interact  comfortably in the boardroom.  84 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Although many successful women from outside the business world are unknown to 
corporate leaders, these women are particularly qualified to serve on boards because of the 
changing nature of corporations. Today a compa nys ability to be responsive to the concerns of 
the community and the environment can influence that companys growth and survival. Women 
are uniquely positioned to be responsive to some of these concerns. Although conditions have 
changed, it should be re membered that most directors of both sexes are over fifty years old. 
Women of that generation were often encouraged to direct their attention toward efforts to 
improve the community. This fact is reflected in the career development  of most of the 
outstandingly successful women of the generation now in their fifties, who currently serve on 
corporate boards: 25 percent are in education and 22 percent are in government, law, and the 
nonprofit sector.  
One organization of women directo rs is helping business become more responsive to the 
changing needs of society by raising the level of corporate awareness about social issues, such 
as problems with the economy, government regulation, the aging population, and the 
environment. This organi zation also serves as a resource center of information on accomplished 
women who are potential candidates for corporate boards.  
1. The author of the passage would be most likely to agree with which of the 
following statements about achievement of the idea l mentioned in line 14 ? 
(A) It has only recently become a possibility.  
(B) It would be easier to meet if more CEOs were women . 
(C) It is very close to being a reality for most corporate boards.  
(D) It might affect the quality o f directors service to corporations.  
(E) It would be more realizable if CEOs had a more extensive range of business 
experience.  
2. According to the passage, the pressure to appoint women to corporate boards 
differs from the pressure to employ women in the work force in which of the 
follo wing ways?  
(A) Corporate boards are under less pressure because they have such a small 
number of openings.  
(B) Corporate boards have received less pressure from stockholders, consumers, 
and workers within companies to include women on their boards.  
(C) Cor porate boards have received less pressure from the media and the public 
to include women on their boards.  
(D) Corporations have only recently been pressured to include women on their 
boards.  
(E) Corporations are not subject to statutory penalty for failing to include women 
on their boards.  
3. All of the following are examples of issues that the organization described in the 
last paragraph  would be likely to advis e corporations on EXCEPT  
(A) long -term inflation   GMAT  85 
 (B) health and safety regulations  
(C) retirement and pension programs  
(D) the energy shortage  
(E) how to develop new markets  
4. It can be inferred from the passage that, when seeking to appoint new member s to 
a corporations board, the chair traditionally looked for candidates who  
(A) had legal and governmental experience  
(B) had experience dealing with community affairs  
(C) could work easily with other members of the board  
(D) were already involved in est ablishing policy for that corporation  
(E) had influential connections outside the business world  
5. According to the passage, which of the following is true about women outside the 
business world who are currently serving on corporate boards?  
(A) Most do not serve on more than one board.  
(B) A large percentage will eventually work on the staff of corporations.  
(C) Most were already known to the chairs of the board to which they were 
appointed.  
(D) A larger percentage are from government and law than are from the nonprofit 
sector.  
(E) Mos t are less than fifty years old.  
6. The passage suggests that corporations of the past differ from modern 
corporations in which of the following ways?  
(A) Corporations had greater input on government policies affecting the business 
community.  
(B) Corporati ons were less responsive to the financial needs of their employees.  
(C) The ability of a corporation to keep up with changing markets was not a 
crucial factor in its success.  
(D) A corporations effectiveness in coping with community needs was less likely 
to affect its growth and prosperity.  
(E) Corporations were subject to more stringent government regulations.  
7. Which of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A problem is described, and then reasons why various proposed solu tions 
succeeded or failed are discussed.  
(B) A problem is described, and then an advantage of resolving it is offered.  
(C) A problem is described, and then reasons for its continuing existence are 
summarized.  
(D) The historical origins of a problem are des cribed, and then various measures 
that have successfully resolved it are discussed.  86 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) The causes of a problem are described, and then its effects are discussed.  
8. It can be inferred from the passage that factors making women uniquely valuable 
members of modern corporate boards would include which of the following?  
I. The nature of modern corporations  
II. The increased number of women CEOs  
III. The careers pursued by women currently available to serve on corporate 
boards  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only 
(D) I and  III only 
(E) I, II, and III