Extended debate concerning the exact point of origin of indi vidual folktales told by 
Afro-American slaves has unfortunately taken precedence over analysis of the tales meaning 
and function. Cultural continuities with Africa were not dependent on importation and 
perpetuation of specific folktales in their pristine form. It is in the place that tales occupied in 
the lives of the slaves and in the meaning slaves derived from them that the clearest 
resemblances to African tradition can be found. Afro -American slaves did not borrow tales 
indiscriminately from the Whites  among whom they lived. Black people were most influenced 
by those Euro -American tales whose functional meaning and aesthetic appeal had the greatest 
similarity to the tales with deep roots in their ancestral homeland. Regardless of where slave 
tales came from, the essential point is that, with respect to language, delivery, details of 
characterization, and plot, slaves quickly made them their own.  
17. The author claims that most studies of folktales told by Afro -American slaves are 
inadequate because the s tudies  
(A) fail to recognize any possible Euro -American influence on the folktales  
(B) do not pay enough attention to the features of a folktale that best reveal an 
African influence  
(C) overestimate the number of folktales brought from Africa by the slave s 
(D) do not consider the fact that a folktale can be changed as it is retold many 
times  
(E) oversimplify the diverse and complex traditions of the slaves ancestral 
homeland  
18. The authors main purpose is to  
(A) cr eate a new field of study  
(B) discredit an existing field of study  
(C) change the focus of a field of study  
(D) transplant sc holarly techniques from one field of study to another  
(E) restrict the scope of a burgeoning new field of study  
19. The passage suggests that the author would regard which of the following areas 
of inquiry as most likely to reveal the slaves cultural c ontinuities with Africa?  
(A) The means by which Blacks disseminated their folktales in 
nineteenth -century America  
(B) Specific regional differences in the styles of delivery used by the slaves in 
telling folktales   GRE  293 
 (C) The functional meaning of Black folkta les in the lives of White children 
raised by slave  
(D) The specific way the slaves used folktales to impart moral teaching to their 
children  
(E) The complexities of plot that appear most frequently in the slaves tales  
20. Which of the following techniques is used by the author in developing the 
argument in the passage?  
(A) Giving a clich  a new meaning  
(B) Pointedly refusing to define key terms  
(C) Alternately presenting generalities and concrete details  
(D) Concluding the passage with a restatement of the first point made in the 
passage  
(E) Juxtaposing statements of what is not the case and statements of what is the 
case 