(The following passage was written  in 1977.)  
Changes in the volume of unemployment  are governed by three fundamental forces: the 
growth of the labor force, t he increase  in output per man -hour, and the growth of total demand 
for goods and services. Changes in the average hours of work enter in exactly parallel fashion 
but have been quantitatively less significant. As productivity  rises, less labor is required p er 
dollar  of national product, or more goods and services can be produced with the same number 
of man -hours. If output does not grow, employment will certainly fall; if production increases 
more rapidly than productivity (less any decline in average hours worked), employment must 
rise. But the labor force grows, too. Unless gross national product (total final expenditure for 
goods and services corrected for price changes) rises more rapidly than the sum of productivity 
increase and labor force growth (again  modified for any change in hours of work), the increase 230 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 in employment will be inadequate to absorb the growth in the labor force. Inevitably the 
unemployment rate will increase. Only when total production expands faster than the rate of 
labor force growth  plus the rate of productivity increase and minus the rate at which average 
annual hours fall does the unemployment rate fall. Increases in productivity were more 
important than growth of the labor force as sources of the wide gains in output experienced i n 
the period from the end of World War II to the mid -sixties. These increases in potential 
production simply were not matched by increases in demand adequate to maintain steady full 
employment.  
Except for the recession years of 1949, 1954, and 1958, the ra te of economic growth 
exceeded  the rate of productivity increase. However, in the late 1950s productivity and the 
labor force were increasing more rapidly than usual, while the growth  of output was slower 
than usual. This accounted for the change in employ ment rates.  
But if part of the national purpose is to reduce and contain unemployment, arithmetic is 
not enough. We must know which of the basic factors we can control and which we wish to 
control. Unemployment  would have risen more slowly or fallen more r apidly if productivity had 
increased more slowly, or the labor force had increased more slowly, or the hours of work had 
fallen more steeply, or total output had grown more rapidly. These are not independent factors, 
however, and a change in any of them mi ght have caused changes in the  others.  
A society can choose to reduce the growth of productivity, and it can probably find ways to 
frustrate its own creativity. However, while a reduction in the growth of productivity at the 
expense of potential output mig ht result in higher employment in the short run, the long -run 
effect on the national interest would be disastrous.  
We must also give consideration to the fact that hidden beneath national  averages is 
continuous movement into, out of, between, and within la bor markets. For example, 15 years 
ago, the average number of persons in the labor force was 73.4 million, with about 66.7 million 
employed and 3.9 million unemployed. Yet 14 million experienced some term of unemployment 
in that year. Some were new entrant s to the labor force; others were laid off temporarily . The 
remainder were those who were permanently or indefinitely severed from their jobs. Thus, the 
average number unemployed during a year understates the actual volume  of involuntary  
displacement that occurs.  
High unemployment is not an inevitable result of the pace of technological change but the 
consequence of passive public policy. We can anticipate a moderate increase in the labor force 
accompanied  by a slow and irregular decline in hours of work. It follows that the output of the 
economy and the aggregate demand to buy it must grow by more than 4 percent a year just 
to prevent the unemployment rate from rising, and by even more if the unemployment rate is to 
fall further. Yet our economy has seldom,  if ever, grown at a rate greater than 3.5 percent for 
any extended length of time. We have no cause of complacency . Positive fiscal, monetary, and 
manpower policies will be needed in the future . 
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) define the e conomic terms used in the discussion of employment  
(B) criticize the decisions of past administrations during recession years  
(C) call for the application of positive economic control policies in the years that  GMAT  231 
 lie ahead  
(D) allay current fears about incre asing unemployment  
(E) document the rise of American productivity since World War II  
2. According to the passage, if the labor force does not grow and there is no decline 
in the average number of hours worked, under which of the following conditions 
will the employment r ate inevitably rise?  
(A) Total production expands faster than the total demand for goods and services.  
(B) The total demand for goods and services and productivity  both rise.  
(C) Output per man -hour and gross national product both rise.  
(D) Productivity in creases more rapidly than production.  
(E) Production increases more rapidly than output per man -hour.  
3. It can be inferred from the passage than in the late 1950s, which of the following 
occurred?  
I. The growth in output was less than 3.5 percent.  
II. The average number of hours worked de clined.  
III. The increase in output per man -hour was greater than usual.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) I and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
4. It can be inferred  from the passage that during the recession years of 1949, 1954, 
and 1958, which of t he following most likely occurred?  
(A) The labor force increased  more rapidly than it did in any other year between 
1945 and 1965.  
(B) More labor was required per dollar of national product than in any other year 
between 1945 and 1965.  
(C) The average numb er of hours worked rose.  
(D) Full employment was attained.  
(E) The rate of unemployment increased.  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that if a policy to increase employment by 
reducing the growth of productivity at the expense of potential output were 
adopted, the author most likely would regard it as  
(A) sound but inadequate  
(B) overly aggressive  
(C) frivolous  
(D) insidious  232 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) unobjectionable  
6. It can be inferred from the passage that, according to the author, the actual 
number of people who experience  some term of unemployment during any given 
year 
(A) is the difference between the number of persons in the labor force and the 
number of persons employed  that year  
(B) does not reflect movement into, out of, between, and within labor markets  
(C) exceeds the average number unemployed during that year  
(D) overstate the volume of involuntary displacement that occurs during the year  
(E) is impossible to calculate  
7. The passage contains information that answers all of the following questions 
EXCEPT:  
(A) What is gross national product?  
(B) What effect does a change in productivity invariably have on gross national 
product?  
(C) Unde r what conditions might employment rise in the short run?  
(D) What effect does an increase in output and a decrease in number of hours 
worked have on productivity?  
(E) What was the average number of people unemployed in 1962?  
8. Which of the following b est describes the organization of the fifth paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) An assertion is made, data are provided to support it, and the assertion is 
reiterated in different words.  
(B) Several figures are given and hypothesis is formulated to explain them.  
(C) An example is given to support the conclusion drawn in the preceding 
paragraph.  
(D) A statement is made, data are provided to illustrate and amplify the statement, 
and a conclusion is drawn.  
(E) A generalization is made and an example is given to refute it.  
9. Which of the following proposals best responds to the author s concerns?  
(A) The government  should manipulate the size of the labor force to prevent 
future recessions.  
(B) The govern ment  should maintain some controls  over the economy, but it 
should allow the employment rate to rise and fall with the gross national 
product, as a check on labor costs.  
(C) People should accept that unemployment is undesirable but unavoidable.  
(D) The government  should manage the economy carefully.  
(E) The government should not interfere in the interplay among the three forces  GMAT  233 
 affecting unemployment.  
10. Which of the following  best summarizes the main idea of the passage?  
(A) We can and must take steps to ensure that the unemployment rate does no t 
continue to rise as our population and our use of technology increase.  
(B) Increases in potential production must be matched by increases in demand in 
order to maintain steady full employment.  
(C) High unemployment is not an inevitable result of the pace  of technological 
change but the consequence of passive public policy.  
(D) If part of the national purpose is to reduce and contain unemployment, 
arithmetic is not enough.  
(E) Full employment , regardless of fluctuations in the economy, is within the 
realm of possibility.