In terms of its prevalence, obesity is the leading disease in the United States. There is no 
universally accepted standard for obesity, defined generally as an excess of adipose tissue , but 
a common rule of thumb classifies people who are more than 20 percent above their desirable 
weight as obese. By this measure, 30 percent of men and 40 percent of women in America are 
obese. Although studies show that few of these  people will e ver recover fully and permanently 
from the disease, the incidence of obesity in future generations can be reduced.  
Adipose tissue is a triumph of evolution. Fat yields 9 calories per gram, while protein, like 
carbohydrates, yields only 4 calories per gram.  Fat also contains much less water than protein  
does. Therefore, fat is much more efficient for storing excess energy than is protein. Primitive 
humans, with uncertain food sources, had a great need for excess fat, and their bodies adapted 
accordingly. Modern humans, with a predictable food supply and a sedentary life -style, are 
burdened by this vestige of evolution. Although they need some adipose tissue to provide 
insulation and protect internal organs from injury, modern humans need much less than their  GMAT  239 
 primitive ancestors did.  
In an attempt to shed excess adipose tissue, many Americans turn from one fad diet to 
another, and a billion -dollar diet industry has grown up to aid them in their efforts. Nevertheless, 
the five -year cure rate for obesity is very low. In fact, by comparison, cancer is more curable. 
The reasons for this are psychological as well as physiological.  
From a physical  standpoint , losing a pound or two a week for a few weeks is not difficult 
because most of the loss is in the form of  protein and water, and protein carries four times its 
weight in water. However, protein is also the only source of nitrogen in the body, and when the 
body loses too much nitrogen, it acts to correct the imbalance  by excreting less nitrogen than it  
takes in. Hence beyond a certain point additional weight loss must come from adipose tissue, 
which, because of its compactness, takes longer to shed. The body s tendency to return  to 
nitrogen balance and to protect its energy reserves can be so strong tha t dieters may stop 
losing or even gain weight while still expending more calories than they ingest. As a result, they 
frequently suffer not only from hunger, weakness, and a decreased metabolic rate, but also 
from depression and inactivity, all of which le ad them to abandon their diets. Probably because 
of numerous psychological factors as well as physiological factors such as increased lipid 
synthesis, they then tend to regain weight rapidly.  
While vigorous attempts to reduce obesity in America should be a imed at all affected, the 
most successful efforts are likely to be those directed toward children. If the advertising and 
food industries stop trying to sell high -calorie , nutritional ly deficient food to children, and if 
parents understand that the feeding  patterns they impose on their children can determine the 
adolescent and adult eating habits those children will develop, the future generation may not be 
as fat as ours is. 
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) explain why prevention is the best  defense against obesity  
(B) criticize the food and advertising industries for encouraging bad eating habits 
and thus contributing to the prevalence of obesity in the United States  
(C) recruit volunteers for a national crusade against obesity  
(D) discourag e dependency on fad diets as a method for losing weight  
(E) argue that obesity is a genetic disorder that is virtually impossible to cure  
2. By the rule of thumb mentioned in the passage, which of the following would be 
considered obese?  
I. A 25 -pound t oddler whose desirable weight is 20 pounds  
II. A large -framed woman weighting 140 pounds  whose desirable weight for 
her height is between 112 and 120 pounds  
III. A 175 -pound man who was 25 pounds over his desirable weight and then 
gained an additional 10 p ounds  
(A) II only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and III only  240 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
3. Which of the following, if true, best helps to explain why a greater percentage of 
women than men in the United States are considered obese by the measure 
mentioned in the passage?  
(A) The measure is the same for both men and wome n, but it is normal for 
women to carry a greater percentage of fat at any weight.  
(B) The average man is heavier than the average woman; therefore, men generally 
need to gain more weight than women do before they are considered obese.  
(C) There are more wo men in the United States than there are men.  
(D) Because of the influence of the fashion and film industries, many American 
women consider themselves obese even though they are not.  
(E) Women burn off  fewer calories than men because their bodies contain a lower 
percentage of muscle, and muscle burns calories at a faster rate than fat.  
4. According to the passage, modern humans do not need to store as much fat as  
primitive humans because  
(A) modern humans work fewer hours than their primitive forebears did  
(B) the diet of modern humans is higher in protein than was the diet of primitive 
humans  
(C) modern  humans eat more regularly than primitive humans did  
(D) prim itive humans  had to insulate their bodies from the cold whereas modern 
humans do not  
(E) the food consumed by modern humans has a higher nutritional value than that 
consumed by primitive humans  
5. All of the following statements about protein are supported by the passage 
EXCEPT:  
(A) Gram for gram, foods that are high in protein are low er in calories than foods 
that are high in fat.  
(B) The body gets all of its nitrogen from protein.  
(C) Nine grams of protein yield the same number of calories as 4 grams of fat.  
(D) Protein  is not converted into adipose tissue.  
(E) Five grams of protei n carry 20 grams of water.  
6. The author mentions that cancer is more curable  (line 27) than obesity  in order 
to 
(A) underscore the point that obesity is the leading disease in the United States  
(B) support the conclusion that it is easier to keep people  from becoming obese 
than it is to cure them once they are  
(C) discourage obese  people from trying to lose weight   GMAT  241 
 (D) demonstrate by analogy that more money should be spent on obesity research  
(E) refute the contention that the causes of obesity are purely physiological  
7. The passage contains information that answers which of the following questions?  
(A) What percent of the total population in the United States is obese?  
(B) What psychologi cal factors cause people to gain weight rapidly once they go 
off a diet?  
(C) What function does nitrogen perform in the body?  
(D) How is an individual s desirable eight determined?  
(E) If a snack bar contains 130 calories and 4 grams of fat, what percen tage of the 
calories in the bar come from fat?  
8. The author mentions all of the following as factors that cause obese people to 
abandon diets EXCEPT  
(A) depression  
(B) increased lipid synthesis  
(C) a negative nit rogen balance  
(D) enervation  
(E) a lower metabolic rate  
9. Which of the following, if it could be demonstrated, would most strengthen the 
claim that the feeding patterns  of children can determine the adolescent and 
adult eating habits those children wi ll develop  (lines 55 -56)? 
(A) The incidence of obesity in children whose parents are both obese is 80 
percent.  
(B) Thirty -six percent of infants who are obese during their first half year of life 
are also overweight between the ages of 20 and 36.  
(C) Exce ssive weight gain during the teen years can set the stage  for a lifetime 
battle against the bulge.  
(D) Up to 80 percent of youngsters who are fat as 5 -year-olds end up fat as adults.  
(E) The average child witnesses more than 15,000 commercials a year for snacks, 
candy, and soft drinks laden with fat, sugar, and calories.