New observations about the age of some globular clusters in our Milky Way galaxy  have 
cast doubt on a  long-held theory about how the galaxy was formed. The Milky Way contains 
about 125 globular clusters (compact groups of anywhere from several tens of thousands  to 
perhaps a million stars) distributed in a roughly spherical halo ar ound the galactic nucleus . The 
stars in these clusters are believed to have been born during the formation of the galaxy, and so 
may be considered relics of the original galactic nebula , holding vital  clues to the way the 
formation took place.  
The conventional theory of the formation of the galaxy contends that roughly 12 to 13 
billion years ago the Milky Way formed over a relatively short time (about 200 million years) 
when a spherical cloud of gas co llapsed under the pressure of its own gravity into a disc 
surrounded by a halo. Such a rapid formation of the galaxy would mean that all stars in the halo 
should be very nearly the same age.  
However, the astronomer Michael Bolte has found considerable vari ation in the ages of 
globular clusters. One of the clusters studied by Bolte is 2 billions years older than most other 
clusters in the galaxy, while another is 2 billion years younger. A colleague of Bolte contends 
that the cluster called Palomar 12 is 5 b illion years younger than most other globular clusters.   GMAT  267 
 To explain the age differences among the globular clusters, astronomers are taking a 
second look at renegade theories. One such newly fashionable theory, first put forward by 
Richard Larson in the e arly 1970s, argues that the halo of the Milky Way formed over a period 
of a billion or more years as hundreds of small gas clouds drifted about, collided, lost orbital 
energy, and finally collapsed into a centrally condensed elliptical system. Larsons co nception of 
a lumpy and turbulent protogalaxy is complemented by computer modeling done in the 
1970s by mathematician Alan Toomre, which suggests that closely interacting spiral galaxies 
could lose enough orbital energy to merge into a single galaxy.  
137. The passage is primarily concerned with discussing  
(A) the importance of determining the age of globular clusters in assessing when 
the Milky Way galaxy was formed  
(B) recent changes in the procedure used by astronomers to study the formation 
of the Mil ky Way galaxy  
(C) current disputes among astronomers regarding the size and form of the Milky 
Way galaxy  
(D) the effect of new discoveries regarding globular clusters on theories about the 
formation of the Milky Way galaxy  
(E) the origin, nature, and significance of groups of stars known as globular 
clusters  
138. According to the passage, one way in which Larsons theory and the conventional 
theory of the formation of the Milky Way galaxy differs is in their assessment o f 
the 
(A) amount of time it took to form the galaxy  
(B) size of the galaxy immediately after its formation  
(C) particular gas involved in the formation of the galaxy  
(D) importance of the age of globular clusters in determining how the galaxy was 
formed  
(E) shape of the halo that formed around the galaxy  
139. Which of the following, if true, would be most useful in supporting the 
conclusions drawn from recent observations about globular clusters?  
(A) There is firm evidence that the absolute age of the Mi lky Way galaxy is 
between 10 and 17 billion years.  
(B) A survey reveals that a galaxy close to the Milky Way galaxy contains 
globular clusters of ages close to the age of Palomar 12.  
(C) A mathematical model proves that small gas clouds move in regular pat terns.  
(D) Space probes indicate that the stars in the Milky Way galaxy are composed of 
several different types of gas.  
(E) A study of over 1,500 individual stars in the halo of the Milky Way galaxy 
indicates wide discrepancies in there ages.  268 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 140. If Bo lte and his colleague are both correct, it can be inferred that the globular 
cluster Paloma r 12 is approximately  
(A) 5 billion years younger than any other cluster in the galaxy  
(B) the same age as most other clusters in the galaxy  
(C) 7 billion years youn ger than another cluster in the galaxy  
(D) 12 billion years younger than most other clusters in the galaxy  
(E) 2 billion years younger than most other clusters in the galaxy  
141. The passage suggests that Toomres work complements Larsons theory because 
it 
(A) specifies more precisely the time frame proposed by Larson  
(B) subtly alters Larsons theory to m ake it more plausible  
(C) supplements Larsons hypothesis with direct astronomical observations  
(D) provides theoretical support for the ideas suggested by Larson  
(E) expands Larsons theory to make it more widely applicable  
142. Which of the following most accurately state s a finding of Boltes research, as 
described in the passage?  
(A) The globular clusters in the Milky Way galaxy are 2 billion years older than 
predicted by the conventional theory.  
(B) The ages of at least some globular clusters in the  Milky Way galaxy differ by 
at least 4 billion years.  
(C) One of the globular clusters in the Milky Way galaxy is 5 billion years 
younger than most others.  
(D) The globular clusters in the Milky Way galaxy are significantly older than the 
individual stars in the halo.  
(E) Most globular clusters in the Milky Way galaxy are between 11 and 15 billion 
years old.  
143. The author of the passage puts the word renegade (line 29) in quotation marks 
most probably in order to  
(A) emphasize the lack of support for  the theories in question  
(B) contrast the controversial quality of the theories in question with the 
respectable character of their formulators  
(C) generate skepticism about the theories in question  
(D) ridicule the scientists who once doubted the theorie s in question  
(E) indicate that the theories in question are no longer as unconventional as they 
once seemed