

It is well known that biological changes at the molecular level have morphogenetic 
consequences, consequences affecting the formation and differentiation of tissues and organs. 
It is superfluous to point out  that gene mutations and disturbances of the bio -synthetic 
processes in the embryo may result in abnormalities in the morphology  (structure) of an 
organism. However, whereas much is known about causes and consequences at the molecular 
level, and in spite of an enormous accumulation of chemical and morphological data on 
embryos of various kinds, our understanding of how genes contro l morphogenesis is still far 
from complete. Perhaps one reason for this is that molecular biologists and morphologists 
speak different languages. Whereas the former speak about messenger -RNA and 
conformational changes of protein molecules, the latter speak  of ectoderms, hypoblasts, and 
neural crests.   GRE  307 
 One solution to this predicament is to try to find some phenomena relevant to 
morphogenesis which both the molecular biologist and the morphologist can understand and 
discuss. As morphogenesis must be basically  the result of changes in behavior of the individual 
cells, it seems logical to ask morphologists to describe the morphogenetic events observed in 
terms of changes in cellular contact, changes in the rate of proliferation of cells, or similar 
phenomena. On ce this is done, it may be appropriate to ask questions about the molecular 
background for these changes. One may, for instance, ask whether variations in cell contact 
reflect alterations in the populations of molecules at the cell surface, or one may inqu ire about 
the molecular basis for the increased cell mobility involved in cell dispersion.  
Studies of this kind have been carried out with cells released from tissues in various ways 
and then allowed to reveal their behavior after being spread out into a t hin layer. In many cases, 
such cells show the ability to reaggregate, after which different cell types may sort themselves 
out into different layers and even take part in still more intricate morphogenetic events. But in 
most cases, the behavior of cells i n the intact embryo is difficult to study because of the 
thickness and opacity of the cell masses. The sea urchin  embryo, however, has the advantage 
that it is so transparent that each cell can be easily observed throughout development. Thus, by 
recording the development of a sea urchin embryo with time -lapse photography, the research 
scientist might discover prev iously unknown features of cellular behavior. Perhaps the study of 
the sea urchin in this manner can provide a medium by which the molecular biologist and the 
morphologist can begin communicating with each other more effectively about the way in 
which gene s control morphogenesis.  
17. The authors primary purpose is to  
(A) outline a procedure and discuss possible applications  
(B) evaluate an experiment in terms of its applicability to medical research  
(C) propose a method for curing specific genetic disorder s 
(D) explain a problem and suggest a solution for it  
(E) reveal the shortcomings of several attitudes toward genetic research  
18. The author states that research into the genetic control of morphogenesis has been 
impeded by  
(A) an incomplete understand ing of biomolecular reactions that are highly 
complex  
(B) a lack of communication between scientists whose work could be 
complementary  
(C) a reluctance on the part of morphologists to share data with molecular 
biologists  
(D) a lack of research in the area of morphology  
(E) the unavailability of suitable research equipment  
19. The major objective of the authors proposal is to  
(A) devise a technique for proving that abnormalities in morphology result from 
gene mutations  308 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) improve the procedures for organizing chemic al and morphological data  
(C) increase the accuracy of measurements of cell populations and cell mobility  
(D) reduce the margin of error in the study of conformational changes of protein 
molecules  
(E) provide a plan for increasing knowledge about the in fluence of genes on 
morphogenesis  
20. It can be inferred from the passage that some cells that have been isolated from an 
organism have the ability to  
(A) control morphogenesis  
(B) reform to make higher organisms  
(C) reorganize to form clusters of cells  
(D) regulate the transmission of light through the cell wall  
(E) regulate the rate of tissue formation  
21. It can be inferred from the passage that the study of the effects of genes on 
morphogenesis is best accomplished by observing  
(A) intact developing embryos  
(B) adult sea urchins  
(C) isolated living cells  
(D) groups of genetically mutated cells  
(E) cells from the same kink of tissue  
22. According to the passage, it is difficult to study cells in most intact embryos 
because  
(A) morphogenetic events cannot be isolated  
(B) embryos die quickly  
(C) embryos are difficult to obtain  
(D) individual cells reaggregate too quickly  
(E) individual cells are difficult to see  
23. Which of the following sequences best describes the authors suggestion for 
future research on morphogenesis?  
(A) Accumulation of data, simpli fication of language, explanation of 
morphogenesis  
(B) Dispersion of cells, evaluation of cell activity, development of an explanatory 
hypothesis  
(C) Classification of cell types, separation of cell, observation of cell activity  
(D) Observation of cell dev elopment, description of cell behavior, explanation at 
the molecular level  
(E) Differentiation of cell types, description of cell structure, analysis of 
molecular components   GRE  309 
 24. The tone of the authors discussion of the difference in the language used by 
morphologists and that used by molecular biologists is one of  
(A) indifference  
(B) neutrality  
(C) derision  
(D) approbation  
(E) indignation  