In recent years, teachers of introductory courses in Asian American studies have been 
facing a dilemma nonexistent a few decades ago, when hardly any texts in that field were 
available. Today, excellent anthologies and othe r introductory texts exist, and books on 
individual Asian American nationality groups and on general issues important for Asian 
Americans are published almost weekly. Even professors who are experts in the field find it 
difficult to decide which of these t o assign to students; nonexperts who teach in related areas 
and are looking for writings for and by Asian American to include in survey courses are in an 
even worse position.  
A complicating factor has been the continuing lack of specialized one -volume refe rence 
works on Asian Americans, such as biographical dictionaries or desktop encyclopedias. Such 
works would enable students taking Asian American studies courses (and professors in related 
fields) to look up basic information on Asian American individuals , institutions, history, and 
culture without having to wade through mountains of primary source material. In addition, give 
such works, Asian American studies professors might feel more free to include more  GMAT  145 
 challenging Asian American material in their intr oductory reading lists, since good reference 
works allow students to acquire on their own the background information necessary to interpret 
difficult or unfamiliar material.  
1. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with doing which of the 
follow ing? 
(A) Recommending a methodology  
(B) Describing a course of study  
(C) Discussing a problem  
(D) Evaluating a past course of action  
(E) Responding to a criticism  
2. The dilemma mentioned in line 2 can best be characterized as being caused by 
the nece ssity to make a choice when faced with a  
(A) lack of acceptable alternatives  
(B) lack of strict standards for evaluating alternatives  
(C) preponderance of bad alternatives as compared to good  
(D) multitude of different alternatives  
(E) large number of a lternatives that are nearly identical in content  
3. The passage suggests that the factor mentioned in lines 14 -17 complicates 
professors attempts to construct introductory reading lists for courses in Asian 
American studies in which of the following ways?  
(A) By making it difficult for professors to identify primary source material and 
to obtain standard information on Asian American history and culture  
(B) By preventing professors from identifying excellent anthologies and 
introductory texts in the field that are both recent and understandable to 
students  
(C) By preventing professors from adequately evaluating the quality of the 
numerous texts currently being published in the field  
(D) By making it more necessary for professors to select readings for their  
courses that are not too challenging for students unfamiliar with Asian 
American history and culture  
(E) By making it more likely that the readings professors assign to students in 
their courses will be drawn solely from primary sources  
4. The passage implies that which of the following was true of introductory courses 
in Asian American studies a few decades ago?  
(A) The range of different textbooks that could be assigned for such courses was 
extremely limited.  
(B) The texts assigned as readings in such courses were often not very 
challenging for students.  
(C) Students often complained about the texts assigned to them in such courses.  146 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) Such courses were offered only at schools whose libraries were rich in 
primary sources.  
(E) Such courses were the only means then available by which people in the 
United States could acquire knowledge of the field.  
5. According to the passage, the existence of good one -volume reference works 
about Asian Americans could result in  
(A) incre ased agreement among professors of Asian American studies regarding 
the quality of the sources available in their field  
(B) an increase in the number of students signing up for introductory courses in 
Asian American studies  
(C) increased accuracy in writin gs that concern Asian American history and 
culture  
(D) the use of introductory texts about Asian American history and culture in 
courses outside the field of Asian American studies  
(E) the inclusion of a wider range of Asian American material in introductory 
reading lists in Asian American studies