
Picture -taking is a technique both for annexing the objective world and for expressing the 
singular self. Photographs depict objective realities that already exist, though only the camera 
can disclose them. And they depict an individual photographers temperament, discovering 
itself through the cameras cropping of reality. That is, photography has t wo antithetical ideals: 
in the first, photography is about the world and the photographer is a mere observe who counts 
for little; but in the second, photography is the instrument of intrepid, questing subjectivity and 
the photographer is all.  
These confli cting ideals arise from a fundamental uneasiness on the part of both 
photographers and viewers of photographs toward the aggressive component in taking a 
picture. Accordingly, the ideal of a photographer as observer is attractive because it implicitly 
denies that picture -taking is an aggressive act. The issue, of course, is not so clear -cut. What 
photographers do cannot be characterized as simply predatory or as simply, and essentially, 
benevolent. As a consequence, one ideal of picture -taking or the othe r is always being 
rediscovered and championed.  
An important result of the coexistence of these two ideals is a recurrent ambivalence 
toward photographys means. Whatever the claims that photography might make to be a form 
of personal expression on a par  with painting, its originality is inextricably linked to the powers 
of a machine. The steady growth of these powers has made possible the extraordinary 
informativeness and imaginative formal beauty of many photographs, like Harold Edgertons 
high-speed  photographs of a bullet hitting its target or of the swirls and eddies of a tennis 
stroke. But as cameras become more sophisticated, more automated, some photographers are 
tempted to disarm themselves or to suggest that they are not really armed, preferri ng to submit 
themselves to the limits imposed by premodern camera technology because a cruder, less 
high-powered machine is thought to give more interesting or emotive results, to leave more 
room for creative accident. For example, it has been virtually a point of honor for many 
photographers, including Walker Evans and Cartier -Bresson, to refuse to use modern 
equipment. These photographers have come to doubt the value of the camera as an instrument 
of fast seeing. Cartier -Bresson, in fact, claims that th e modern camera may see too fast.  
This ambivalence toward photographic means determines trends in taste. The cult of the 
future (of faster and faster seeing) alternates over time  with the wish to return to a purer 
pastwhen images had a handmade quality. This nostalgia for some pristine state of the  GRE  305 
 photographic enterprise is currently widespread and underlies the present -day enthusiasm for 
daguerreotypes and the wok of fo rgotten nineteenth -century provincial photographers. 
Photographers and viewers of photographs, it seems, need periodically to resist their own 
knowingness.  
21. According to the passage, interest among photographers in each of photographys 
two ideals can b e described as  
(A) rapidly changing  
(B) cyclically recurring  
(C) steadily growing  
(D) unimportant to the viewers of photographs  
(E) unrelated to changes in technology  
22. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) establishing new technical standards for contemporary photography  
(B) analyzing the influence of photographic ideals on picture -taking  
(C) tracing the development of camera technology in the twentieth century  
(D) describing how photographers individual temperaments are reflected in their 
work  
(E) explaining how the technical limitations imposed by certain photographers on 
themselves affect their work  
23. The passag e states all of the following about photographs EXCEPT:  
(A) They can display a cropped reality.  
(B) The can convey information.  
(C) They can depict the photographers temperament.  
(D) They can possess great formal beauty.  
(E) They can change the viewer s sensibilities.  
24. The author mentions the work of Harold Edgerton in order to provide an example 
of 
(A) how a controlled ambivalence toward photographys means can produce 
outstanding pictures  
(B) how the content of photographs has changed from the nine teenth century to 
the twentieth  
(C) the popularity of high -speed photography in the twentieth century  
(D) the relationship between photographic originality and technology  
(E) the primacy of formal beauty over emotional content  
25. The passage suggests that photographers such as Walker Evans prefer 
old-fashioned techniques and equipment because these photographers  
(A) admire instruments of fast seeing  306 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) need to feel ar med by technology  
(C) strive for intense formal beauty in their photographs  
(D) like the discipline that comes from self -imposed limitations  
(E) dislike the dependence of photographic effectiveness on the powers of a 
machine  
26. According to the passage , the two antithetical ideals of photography differ 
primarily in the  
(A) value that each places on the beauty of the finished product  
(B) emphasis that each places on the emotional impact of the finished product  
(C) degree of technical knowledge that each requires of the photographer  
(D) extent of the power that each requires of the photographers equipment  
(E) way in which each defines the role of the photographer  
27. Which of the following statements would be most likely to begin the paragraph 
immediately following the passage?  
(A) Photographers, as a result of their heightened awareness of time, are 
constantly trying to capture events and actions that are fleeting.  
(B) Thus the cult of the future, the worship of machines and speed, is firmly 
established in spite of efforts to the contrary by some photographers.  
(C) The rejection of technical knowledge, however, can never be complete and 
photography cannot for any length of time pretend that it has no weapons.  
(D) The point of honor involved in rejecting complex equipment is, however, of 
no significance to the viewer of a photograph.  
(E) Consequently the impulse to return to the past through images that suggest a 
handwrought quality is nothing more that a passing fad.  