148 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Schools expect textbooks to be a valuable source of information for students. My research 
suggests, however, that textbooks that address the place of Native Americans within the history 
of the United States distort history to suit a particular cultural value system. In some textbooks, 
for example, settlers are pictured as more humane, complex, skillful, and wise than Native 
American. In ess ence, textbooks stereotype and deprecate the numerous Native American 
cultures while reinforcing the attitude that the European conquest of the New World denotes 
the superiority of European cultures. Although textbooks evalu ate Native American architecture , 
political systems, and homemaking, I contend that they do it from an ethnocentric, European 
perspective without recognizing that other perspectives are possible.  
One argument against my contention asserts that, by nature, textbooks are culturally 
biased and that I am simply underestimating childrens ability to see through these biases. 
Some researchers even claim that by the time students are in high school, they know they 
cannot take textbooks literally. Yet substantial evidence exists to the contrary. Two researchers, 
for example, have conducted studies that suggest that childrens attitudes about particular 
culture are strongly influenced by the textbooks used in schools. Given this, an ongoing, careful 
review of how school textbooks depict Native Amer ican is certainly warranted.  
1. Which of the following would most logically be the topic of the paragraph 
immediately following the passage?  
(A) Specific ways to evaluate the biases of United States history textbooks  
(B) The centrality of the teachers rol e in United States history courses  
(C) Nontraditional methods of teaching United States history  
(D) The contributions of European immigrants to the development of the United 
States  
(E) Ways in which parents influence childrens political attitudes  
2. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) describe in detail one research study regarding the impact of history 
textbooks on childrens attitudes and beliefs about certain cultures  
(B) describe revisions that should be made to United States history textbo oks 
(C) discuss the difficulty of presenting an accurate history of the United States  
(D) argue that textbooks used in schools stereotype Native Americans and 
influence childrens attitudes  
(E) summarize ways in which some textbooks give distorted pictures of the 
political systems developed by various Native American groups  
3. The author mentions two researchers studies (lines  22-25) most likely in order to  
(A) suggest that childrens po litical attitudes are formed primarily through 
textbooks  
(B) counter the claim that children are able to see through stereotypes in 
textbooks  
(C) suggest that younger children tend to interpret the messages in textbooks 
more literally than do older childre n  GMAT  149 
 (D) demonstrate that textbooks carry political messages meant to influence their 
readers  
(E) prove that textbooks are not biased in terms of their political presentations  
4. The authors attitude toward the content of the history textbooks discussed in the 
passage is best described as one of  
(A) indifference  
(B) hesitance  
(C) neutrality  
(D) amusement  
(E) disapproval  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that the researchers mentioned in line 19 
would be most likely to agree with which of the following statements?  
(A) Students form attitudes about cultures other than their own primarily inside 
the school environment.  
(B) For the most part, seniors in high school know that textbooks can be biased.  
(C) Textbooks play a crucial role in shaping the attitudes and beliefs of students.  
(D) Elementary school students are as likely to recognize bi ases in textbooks as 
are high school students.  
(E) Students are less likely to give credence to history textbooks than to 
mathematics textbooks.  
6. The author implies that which of the following will occur if textbooks are not 
carefully reviewed?  
(A) Children will remain ignorant of the European se ttlers conquest of the New 
World.  
(B) Children will lose their ability to recognize biases in textbooks.  
(C) Children will form negative stereotypes of Native Americans.  
(D) Children will develop an understanding of ethnocentrism.  
(E) Children will sto p taking textbooks seriously.