Many readers assume that, as a neoclassical literary critic, Samuel Johnson would normally 
prefer the abstract, the formal, and the regulated to the concrete, the natural, and the  GMAT  247 
 spontaneous in a work of literature. Yet any close reading of Johnson s critic ism shows that 
Johnson is not blind to the importance of the immediate, vivid, specific detail in literature; rather, 
he would underscore the need for the telling  rather than the merely accidental  detail.  
In other ways, too, Johnson s critical method had m uch in common with  that of the 
Romantics, with whom Johnson and, indeed, the entire neoclassical tradition are generally 
supposed to be in conflict. Johnson was well aware, for example, of the sterility of literary 
criticism that is l egalistic or pedantic, as was the case with the worst products of the 
neoclassical school. His famous argument against the slavish following of the three unities  of 
classical drama is a good example, as is his defense of the supposedly illegitimate tragicomic  
mode of Shakespeare s latest plays. Note, in particular, the basis of that defense: That this is a 
practice contrary to the rules of criticism,  Johnson wrote, will be readily allowed; but there is 
always an appeal from criticism to nature.  
The sentiment thus expressed could easily be endorsed by any of the Romantics; the 
empiricism it exemplifies is vital quality of Johnson s criticism, as is the willingness to jettison 
laws of criticism when to do so makes possible  a more direct appeal to the  emotions of the 
reader. Addison s Cato, highly praised in Johnson s day for its correctness,  is damned with 
faint praise by Johnson: Cato affords a splendid exhibition of artificial and fictitious manners, 
and delivers just and noble sentiments, in dic tion easy, elevated, and harmonious, but its hopes 
and fears communicate no vibration to the heart.  Wordsworth could hardly demur.  
Even on the question of poetic diction, which, according to the usual interpretation of 
Wordsworth s 1800 preface to the Lyrical Ballads , was the central area of conflict between 
Romantic and Augustan, Johnson s views are surprisingly modern.  In his Life of Dryden , he 
defends the use of a special diction in poetry, it is true; but his reasons are all -important. For 
Johnson, p oetic diction should serve the ends of direct emotional impact and ease of 
comprehension, not those of false profundity or grandiosity. Words too familiar,  he wrote, or 
too remote, defeat the purpose of a poet. From those sounds which we hear on small o r on 
coarse occasions, we do not easily receive strong impressions, or delightful images; and words 
to which we are nearly strangers, whenever they occur, draw that attention on themselves 
which they should transmit to things.  If the poetic diction of the  neoclassical poets, at its worst, 
erects needless barriers between reader and meaning, that envisioned by Johnson would do 
just the opposite : it would put the reader in closer contact with the things  that are the poem s 
subject.  
1. The author of the pas sage develops her points about Johnson primarily by  
(A) contrasting Johnsons  critical methods with those of his contemporaries  
(B) citing  specific illustrations drawn  from Johnson s work  
(C) alluding to contemporary comments about Johnson s theories  
(D) q uoting Johnson s remarks about the critical approaches prevalent in his own 
day 
(E) emphasizing the fallacies inherent in the most common view of Johnson  
2. The passage implies that the judging of literary works according to preconceived 
rules  248 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) tends  to lessen the effectiveness of much modern literary criticism  
(B) is the primary distinguishing mark of the neoclassical critic  
(C) was the primary neoclassical technique against which the Romantics  rebelled  
(D) is the underlying basis of much of Johnson s critical work  
(E) characterizes examples  of the worst neoclassical criticism  
3. The passage implies that the neoclassical critics generally condemned  
(A) Shakespeare s use of the tragicomic  (line 18) literary mode  
(B) the slavish following of the three unities  (line 16) in drama  
(C) attempts to judge literary merit on the basis of correctness  (line 28)  
(D) artificiality and abstraction in literary works  
(E) the use of a special diction in the writing of poetry  
4. According to the author, Johnson s defense of  Shakespeares  latest plays 
illustrates Johnson s reliance on which of the following in his criticism?  
(A) The sentiments endorsed by the Romantics  
(B) The criteria set forth by Wordsworth in his 1800 preface to the Lyrical 
Ballads  
(C) The precedents estab lished by the Greek and Roman playwrights of the 
Classical Age  
(D) The principles followed  by the neoclassical school of criticism  
(E) His own experience and judgment  
5. According to the passage, Johnson s opinion of Addison s Cato  was 
(A) roundly condemnatory  
(B) somewhat self -contradictory  
(C) ultimately negative  
(D) effusively adulatory  
(E) uncharacteristically bold  
6. Accor ding to the passage, Johnson s views on the use of a special diction in the 
writing of poetry were  
(A) modern  in their rejection of a clear -cut division between the diction of 
poetry and that of prose  
(B) neoclassical  in their emphasis on the use of la nguage that appeals directly 
to the emotions  of the reader  
(C) Romantic  in their defense of the idea that a special diction for poetry could 
be stylistically effective  
(D) modern  in their underlying concern for the impact of the literary work on 
the sensibility  of the reader  
(E) neoclassical  in their emphasis on ease of comprehension as a literary  virtue   GMAT  249 
 7. It can be inferred from the passage that in addition to being a literary critic, 
Johnson was also a  
(A) surprisingly modern poet  
(B) poet in th e Augustan mode  
(C) dramatist  
(D) biographer  
(E) naturalist  
8. Which one of the following statements best summarizes the main point of the 
passage?  
(A) Although many of Johnson s critical opinions resemble those of the 
neoclassical critics, his basic co ncerns are closer to those of the Romantics.  
(B) The usual classification of Johnson as a member of the neoclassical  school of 
criticism is based on an inaccurate evaluation of his critical theories and 
ideals.  
(C) The Romantic critics were mistaken in the ir belief that the critical ideas they 
formulated represented a departure from those propounded by Johnson.  
(D) Although many of Johnson s critical opinions resemble those of the Romantic 
critics, his basic concerns  are closer to those of the neoclassical critics.  
(E) Johnson s literary criticism represents an attempt to unify the best elements of 
the neoclassical and the Romantic schools of criticism.  
9. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) defending a reputation  
(B) reconciling con flicting views  
(C) comparing two schools of thought  
(D) challenging an assumption  
(E) presenting new evidence in support of an established theory