Until recently most astronomers believed that the space between the galaxies in our 
universe was a near -perfect vacuum. This orthodox view of the universe  is now being 
challenged by astronomers who believe that a heavy rain of gas is falling into many galaxies 
from the supposedly empty space around them. The gas apparently condenses into a collection 
of small stars, each a little larger than the planet Ju piter. These stars vastly outnumber the 
other stars in a given galaxy. The amount of intergalactic rainfall into some of these galaxies 
has been enough to double their mass in the time since they formed. Scientists have begun to  GMAT  89 
 suspect that this interga lactic gas is probably a mixture of gases left over from the big bang 
when the galaxies were formed and gas was forced out of galaxies by supernova explosions.  
It is well known that when gas is cooled at a constant pressure its volume decreases. Thus, 
the physicist Fabian reasoned that as intergalactic gas cools, the cooler gas shrinks inward 
toward the center of the galaxy. Meanwhile its place is taken by hotter intergalactic gas from 
farther out on the edge of the galaxy, which cools as it is compressed  and flows into the galaxy. 
The net result is a continuous flow of gas, starting as hot gases in intergalactic space and 
ending as a drizzle of cool gas called a cooling flow, falling into the central galaxy.  
A fairly heretical idea in the 1970s, the co oling-flow theory gained support when Fabian 
observed a cluster of galaxies in the constellation Perseus and found the central galaxy, NGC 
1275, to be a strange -looking object with irregular, thin strands of gas radiating from it. 
According to previous spe culation, these strands were gases that had been blown out by an 
explosion in the galaxy. Fabian, however, disagreed. Because the strands of gas radiating from 
NGC 1275 are visible in optical photographs, Fabian suggested that such strands consisted not 
of gas blown out of the galaxy but of cooling flows of gas streaming inward. He noted that the 
wavelengths of the radiation emitted by a gas would changes as the gas cooled, so that as the 
gas flowed into the galaxy and became cooler, it would emit not x -rays, but visible light, like 
that which was captured in the photographs. Fabians hypothesis was supported by Canizares 
determination in 1982 that most of the gas in the Perseus cluster was at a temperature of 80 
million degrees Kelvin, whereas the gas imme diately surrounding NGC 1275 (the subject of the 
photographs) was at one -tenth this temperature.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) illustrate a hypothesis about the origin of galaxies  
(B) provide evidence to dispute an accepted theory about t he evolution of 
galaxies  
(C) summarize the state of and prospects for research in intergalactic astronomy  
(D) report new data on the origins of intergalactic gas  
(E) reconcile opposing views on the formation of intergalactic gas  
2. The author uses the p hrase orthodox view of the universe ( line 3 ) to refer to the 
belief that  
(A) the space between the galaxies is devoid of matter  
(B) the space between galaxies is occupied by stars that cannot be detected by 
optical photographs  
(C) galaxies have decreased in mass by half since their formation  
(D) galaxies contain stars, each the size of Jupiter, which form clusters  
(E) galaxies are being penetrated by gas forced out of other galaxies by supernova 
explosions  
3. It can be inferred from the passage that, if Fabian is correct, gas in the peripheral 
regions of a galaxy cluster  
(A) streams outward into intergalactic sp ace 90 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) is hotter than gas in the central regions of the galaxy  
(C) is composed primarily of gas left over from the big bang  
(D) results in the creation of unusually large stars  
(E) expands to increase the size of the galaxy  
4. The author of the passage  probably mentions Canizares determination in order to  
(A) clarify an ambiguity in Fabians research findings  
(B) illustrate a generalization about the temperature of gas in a galaxy cluster  
(C) introduce a new argument in support of the orthodox view of galaxies  
(D) provide support for Fabians assertions about the Perseus galaxies  
(E) provide an alternate point of view concerning the movement of gas within a 
galaxy cluster  
5. According to the passage, Fabian believes that gas flowing into a central galaxy 
has which of the following characteristics?  
(A) It is one -tenth hotter tha n it was in the outer regions of the galaxy cluster.  
(B) It emits radiation with wavelengths that change as the gas moves toward the 
center of the galaxy.  
(C) The total amount of radiation emitted diminishes as the gas cools.  
(D) It loses 90 percent of its  energy as it moves to the center of the galaxy.  
(E) It condenses at a rate much slower than the rate of decrease in temperature as 
the gas flows inward.  
6. According to the passage, Fabians theory makes use of which of the following 
principles?  
(A) Gas emanating from an explosion will be hotter the  more distant it is from the 
origin.  
(B) The wavelength of radiation emitted by a gas as it cools remains constant.  
(C) If pressure remains constant, the volume of a gas will decrease as it is cooled.  
(D) The volume of a gas will increase as the pressure i ncreases.  
(E) As gas cools, its density decreases.  
7. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following is true of Fabians 
theory?  
(A) It did not receive approval until Canizares work was published.  
(B) It was not widely accepted in the 1970s.  
(C) It did not receive support initially because technology was not available to 
confirm its tenets.  
(D) It supports earlier speculation that intergalactic gas was largely the result of 
explosions outside the galaxy.  
(E) It was widely challenged until x -ray evidence of gas temperatures in NGC 
1275 had been presented.   GMAT  91