In 1977 the prestigious Ewha Womens University in Seoul, Korea, announced the opening 
of the first womens studies program in Asia. Few academic programs have eve r received such 
public attention. In broadcast debates, critics dismissed the program as a betrayal of national 
identity, an imitation of Western ideas, and a distraction from the real task of national 
unification and economic development. Even supporters underestimated the program; they 
thought it would be merely another of the many Western ideas that had already proved useful 
in Asian culture, akin to airlines, electricity, and the assembly line. The founders of the program, 
however, realized that neither  view was correct. They had some reservations about the 
applicability of Western feminist theories to the role of women in Asia and felt that such theories 
should be closely examined. Their approach has thus far  yielded important critiques o f Western 
theory, informed by the special experience of Asian women.  
For instance, like the Western feminist critique of the Freudian model of the human psyche, 
the Korean critique finds Freudian theory culture -bound, but in ways different from those cited  
by Western theorists. The Korean theorists claim that Freudian theory assumes the universality 
of the Western nuclear, male -headed family and focuses on the personality formation of the 
individual, independent of  society . An analysis based on such assumptions could be valid for a 
highly competitive, individualistic society. In the Freudian family drama , family members are 
assumed to be engaged in a Darwinian struggle against each other father against son and 
sibling against sibling. Such a concept projects the competitive model of Western society onto 
human personalities. But in the Asian concept of personal ity there is no ideal attached to 
individualism or to the independent self. The Western model of personality development does 
not explain major characteristics of the Korean personality, which is social and group -centered. 
The self is a social being defi ned by and acting in a group, and the well -being of both men 
and women is determined by the equilibrium of the group, not by individual self-assertion . The 
ideal is one of interdependency.  
In such a context, what is recognized as dependency in Western psychiatric terms is not, 
in Korean terms, an admission of weakness or failure. All this bears directly on the Asian 
perception o f mens and womens psychology because men are also dependent . In Korean 
culture, men cry and otherwise easily show their emotions, something that might be considered 
a betrayal of masculinity in Western culture. In the kinship -based society of Korea, fo ur 
generations may live in the same house, which means that people can be sons and daughters 
all their lives, whereas in Western culture, the roles of husband and son, wife and daughter, are 
often incompatible.  68 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 1. Which of the following best summarizes the  content of the passage?  
(A) A critique of a particular womens studies program  
(B) A report of work in social theory done by a particular womens studies 
program  
(C) An assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of a particular womens 
studies program  
(D) An analysis of the philosophy underlying womens studies programs  
(E) An abbreviated history of Korean womens studies programs  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that Korean scholars in the field of womens 
studies undertook an analysis of Freudian theory as a response to which of the 
following?  
(A) Attacks by c ritics of the Ewha womens studies program  
(B) The superficiality of earlier critiques of Freudian theory  
(C) The popularity of Freud in Korean psychiatric circles  
(D) Their desire to encourage Korean scholars to adopt the Freudian model  
(E) Their asses sment of the relevance and limitations of Western feminist theory 
with respect to Korean culture  
3. Which of the following conclusions about the introduction of Western ideas to 
Korean society can be supported by information contained in the passage?  
(A) E xcept for technological innovations, few Western ideas have been 
successfully transplanted into Korean society.  
(B) The introduction of Western ideas to Korean society is viewed by some 
Koreans as a challenge to Korean identity.  
(C) The development of the Korean economy depends heavily on the 
development of new academic programs modeled after Western programs.  
(D) The extent to which Western ideas must be adapted for acceptance by Korean 
society is minimal.  
(E) The introduction of Western ideas to Korean  society accelerated after 1977.  
4. It can be inferred from the passage that the broadcast media in Korea considered 
the establishment of the Ewha womens studies program  
(A) praiseworthy  
(B) insignificant  
(C) newsworthy  
(D) imitative  
(E) incomprehensib le 
5. It can be inferred from the passage that the position taken by some of the 
supporters of the Ewha womens studies program was problematic to the founders 
of the program because those supporters   GMAT  69 
 (A) assumed that the program would be based on the uncri tical adoption of 
Western theory  
(B) failed to show concern for the issues of national unification and economic 
development  
(C) were unfamiliar with Western feminist theory  
(D) were not themselves scholars in the field of womens studies  
(E) accepted the universality of Freudian theory  
6. Which of the following statements is most consistent with the view of personality 
development held by the Ewha womens studies group?  
(A) Personality development occurs in identifiable stages, beginni ng with 
dependency in childhood and ending with independence in adulthood.  
(B) Any theory of personality development, in order to be valid, must be 
universal.  
(C) Personality development is influenced by the characteristics of the society in 
which a person  lives.  
(D) Personality development is hindered if a person is not permitted to be 
independent.  
(E) No theory of personality development can account for the differences 
between Korean and Western culture.  
7. Which of the following statements about the Western feminist critique of 
Freudian theory can be supported by information contained in the pa ssage?  
(A) It recognizes the influence of Western culture on Freudian theory.  
(B) It was written after 1977.  
(C) It acknowledges the universality of the nuclear, male -headed family.  
(D) It challenges Freuds analysis of the role of daughters in Western soc iety. 
(E) It fails to address the issue of competitiveness in Western society.  
8. According to the passage, critics of the Ewha womens studies program cited the 
program as a threat to which of the following?  
I. National identity  
II. National unification  
III. Economic development  
IV . Family integrity  
(A) I only 
(B) I and II only 
(C) I, II, and III only 
(D) II, III, and IV only 
(E) I, II, III , and IV 70 GMAT, GRE, LSAT 