
Climatic conditions are delicately adjusted to the composition of the Earths atmosphere. If 
there were a change in the atmosphere for example, in the relative proportions of 
atmospheric gases the climate would probably cha nge also. A slight increase in water vapor, 
for instance, would increase the heat -retaining capacity of the atmosphere and would lead to a 
rise in global temperatures. In contrast, a large increase in water vapor would increase the 
thickness and extent of the cloud layer, reducing the amount of solar energy reaching the 
Earths surface.  
The level of carbon dioxide, CO 2, in the atmosphere has an important effect on climatic 
change. Most of the Earths incoming energy is short -wavelength radiation, which tend s to pass 
through atmospheric CO 2 easily. The Earth, however, reradiates much of the received energy as 
long-wavelength radiation, which CO 2 absorbs and then remits toward the Earth. This 
phenomenon, known as the greenhouse effect, can result in an increas e in the surface 
temperature of a planet. An extreme example of the effect is shown by Venus, a planet covered 
by heavy clouds composed mostly of CO 2, whose surface temperatures have been measured at 
430. If the CO 2 content of the atmosphere is reduced, the temperature falls. According to one 
respectable theory, if the atmospheric CO 2 concentration were halved, the Earth would become 
completely covered with ice. Another equally respectable theory, howeve r, states that a halving 
of the CO 2 concentration would lead only to a reduction in global temperatures of 3 . 
If, because of an increase in forest fires or volcanic activity, the CO 2 content of the  GRE  315 
 atmosphere increased, a warmer climate would be produced.  Plant growth, which relies on 
both the warmth and the availability of CO 2 would probably increase. As a consequence, plants 
would use more and more CO 2. Eventually CO 2 levels would diminish and the climate, in turn, 
would become cooler. With reduced tempe ratures many plants would die; CO 2 would thereby 
be returned to the atmosphere and gradually the temperature would rise again. Thus, if this 
process occurred, there might be a long -term oscillation in the amount of CO 2 present in the 
atmosphere, with regul ar temperature increases and decreases of a set magnitude.  
Some climatologists argue that the burning of fossil fuels has raised the level of CO 2 in the 
atmosphere and has caused a global temperature increase of at least 1 . But a supposed 
global temperatu re rise of 1  may in reality be only several regional temperature increases, 
restricted to areas where there are many meteorological stations and caused simply by shifts in 
the pattern of atmospheric circulation. Other areas, for example the Southern Hemis phere 
oceanic zone, may be experiencing an equivalent temperature decrease that is unrecognized 
because of the shortage of meteorological recording stations.  
21. The passage supplies information for answering which of the following 
questions?  
(A) Why are p rojections of the effects of changes in water vapor levels on the 
climate so inaccurate?  
(B) What are the steps in the process that takes place as CO 2 absorbs 
long-wavelength radiation?  
(C) How might our understanding of the greenhouse effect be improved i f the 
burning of fossil fuels were decreased?  
(D) What might cause a series of regular increases and decreases in the amount of 
CO 2 in the atmosphere?  
(E) Why are there fewer meteorological recording stations in the Southern 
Hemisphere oceanic zone than  elsewhere?  
22. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) explaining the effects that the burning of fossil fuels might have on climate  
(B) illustrating the effects of CO 2 on atmospheric radiation  
(C) discussing effects that changes in the CO 2 level in th e atmosphere might have 
on climate  
(D) challenging hypotheses about the effects of water vapor and CO 2 on climate  
(E) refuting hypotheses by climatologists about the causes of global temperature 
fluctuations  
23. The passage suggests that a large decrease in the amount of CO 2 in the 
atmosphere would result in  
(A) at least a slight decrease in global temperatures  
(B) at the most a slight increase in short -wavelength radiation reaching the Earth  
(C) a slight long -term increase in global temperatures  
(D) a large long -term increase in the amount of volcanic activity  316 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) a slight short -term increase in atmosphere wate r vapor content  
24. The author refers to Venus primarily in order to  
(A) show the inherent weakness of the greenhouse effect theory  
(B) show that the greenhouse effect works on other planets but not on Earth  
(C) show the extent to which Earths atmosphere differs from that of Venus  
(D) support the contention that as water vapor increase, the amount of CO 2 
increases  
(E) support the argument that the CO 2 level in the atmosphere has a significant 
effect on climate  
25. The passage suggests that if there were a slight global warming at the present 
time, it would be  
(A) easy to measure the exact increase in temperature  because of the abundance 
of temperature recording stations throughout the world  
(B) difficult to measure the increase of CO 2 in the atmosphere because of local 
variations in amounts  
(C) easy to demonstrate the effects of the warming on the water vapor in the 
atmosphere  
(D) difficult to prove that the warming was caused by the burning of fossil fuels  
(E) easy to prove that the warming was caused by an increase of cloud cover  
26. The discussion of climate in the passage suggests which of the following 
conclusion?  
I. Climate is not perfectly stable, and slight regional temperature variations can 
be considered a normal feature of the environment.  
II. We are unable at present to measure global temperature changes precisely . 
III. The most important cause of regional climatic fluctuations is the change in 
CO 2 levels in the atmosphere.  
(A) I only  
(B) III only 
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
27. All of the following can be found in the authors discussion of climate EXCEPT  
(A) a statement about the effects of increased volcanic activity on the Earths 
temperatures  
(B) an indication of the effect of an increase in water v apor in the atmosphere  
(C) a contrast between two theories about the effects of a lowering of CO 2 levels 
in the atmosphere  
(D) a generalization about the efficiency of meteorological recording stations   GRE  317 
 (E) a hypothesis about the relationship between atm ospheric gases and changes in 
climate  