The function of capital markets is to facilitate an exchange of funds among all participants, 
and yet in practice we find that certain p articipants are not on a par with others. Members of 
society have varying degrees of market strength in terms of information they bring to a 
transaction, as well as of purchasing power and creditworthiness, as defined by lenders.  
For example, within minori ty communities, capital markets do not properly fulfill their 
functions; they do not provide access to the aggregate flow of funds in the United States. The 
financial system does not generate the credit or investment vehicles needed for underwriting 
econom ic development in minority areas. The problem underlying this dysfunction is found in a 
rationing mechanism affecting both the available alternatives for investment and the amount of 
financial resources. This creates a distributive mechanism penalizing mem bers of minority 
groups because of their socioeconomic differences from others. The existing system expresses 288 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 definite socially based investment preferences that result from the previous allocation of 
income and that influence the allocation of resources f or the present and future. The system 
tends to increase the inequality of income distribution. And, in the United States economy, a 
greater inequality of income distribution leads to a greater concentration of capital in certain 
types of investment.  
Most t raditional financial -market analysis studies ignore financial markets deficiencies in 
allocation because of analysts inherent preferences for the simple model of perfect competition.  
Conventional financial analysis pays limited attention to issues of mar ket structure and 
dynamics, relative costs of information, and problems of income distribution. Market 
participants are viewed as acting as entirely independent and homogeneous individuals with 
perfect foresight about capital -market behavior. Also, it is a ssumed that each individual in the 
community at large has the same access to the market and the same opportunity to transact 
and to express the preference appropriate to his or her individual interest. Moreover, it is 
assumed that transaction costs for var ious types of financial instruments (stocks, bonds, etc.) 
are equally known and equally divided among all community members.  
276. The main point made by the passage is that  
(A) financial markets provide for an optimum allocation of resources among all 
comp eting participants by balancing supply and demand  
(B) the allocation of financial resources takes place among separate individual 
participants, each of whom has access to the market  
(C) the existence of certain factors adversely affecting members of minori ty 
groups shows that financial markets do not function as conventional theory 
says they function  
(D) investments in minority communities can be made by the use of various 
alternative financial instruments, such as stocks and bonds  
(E) since transaction costs for stocks, bonds, and other financial instruments are 
not equally apportioned among all minority -group members, the financial 
market is subject to criticism  
277. The passage states that traditional studies of the financial market overlook 
imbalances  in the allocation of financial resources because  
(A) an optimum allocation of resources is the final result of competition among 
participants  
(B) those performing the studies choose an oversimplified description of the 
influences on competition  
(C) such i mbalances do not appear in the statistics usually compiled to measure 
the markets behavior  
(D) the analysts who study the market are unwilling to accept criticism of their 
methods as biased  
(E) socioeconomic difference form the basis of a rationing mec hanism that puts 
minority groups at a disadvantage  
278. The authors main point is argued by   GMAT  289 
 (A) giving examples that support a conventional generalization  
(B) showing that the view opposite to the authors is self -contradictory  
(C) criticizing the presupp ositions of a proposed plan  
(D) showing that omissions in a theoretical description make it inapplicable in 
certain cases  
(E) demonstrating that an alternative hypothesis more closely fits the data  
279. A difference in which of the following would be an example of inequality in 
transaction costs as alluded to in lines 40 -43? 
(A) Maximum amounts of loans extended by a bank  to businesses in different 
areas  
(B) Fees charged to large and small investors for purchasing stocks  
(C) Prices of similar goods offered in large and small stores in an area  
(D) Stipends paid to different attorneys for preparing legal suits for damages  
(E) Exchange rates in dollars for currencies of different countries  
280. Which of the following can be inferred about minority communities on the basis 
of the passage?  
(A) They provide a significant portion of the funds that become available for 
investmen t in the financial market.  
(B) They are penalized by the tax system, which increases the inequality of the 
distribution of income between investors and wage earners.  
(C) They do no receive the share of the amount of funds available for investment 
that woul d be expected according to traditional financial -market analysis.  
(D) They are not granted governmental subsidies to assist in underwriting the cost 
of economic development . 
(E) They provide the same access to alternative sources of credit to finance 
businesses as do majority communities.  
281. According to the passage, a questionable assumption of the conventional theory 
about the operation of financial markets is that  
(A) creditworthiness as determined by lenders is a factor determining market 
access  
(B) market structure and market dynamics depend on income distribution  
(C) a scarcity of alternative sources of funds would result from taking 
socioeconomic factors into consideration  
(D) those who engage in financial -market transactions are perfectly well i nformed 
about the market  
(E) inequalities in income distribution are increased by the functioning of the 
financial market  
282. According to the passage, analysts have conventionally tended to view those who 
participate in financial market as  290 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) judging  investment preferences in terms of the good of society as a whole  
(B) influencing the allocation of funds through prior ownership of certain kinds of 
assets  
(C) varying in market power with respect to one another  
(D) basing judgments about future events m ainly on chance  
(E) having equal opportunities to engage in transactions