The new school of political history that emerged in the 1960s and 1970s sought to go 
beyond the tradi tional focus of political historians on leaders and government institutions by 
examining directly the political practices of ordinary citizens. Like the old approach, however, 
this new approach excluded women. The very techniques these historians used to u ncover 
mass political behavior in the nineteenth -century United State squantitative analyses of 
election returns, for example were useless in analyzing the political activities of women, who 
were denied the vote until 1920.  
By redefining political activit y, historian Paula Baker has developed a political history that 
includes women. She concludes that among ordinary citizens, political activism by women in 
the nineteenth century prefigured trends in twentieth -century politics. Defining politics as 
any action taken to affect the course of behavior of government or of the community, Baker 
concludes that, while voting and holding office were restricted to men, women in the 
nineteenth century organized themselves into societies committed to social issues s uch as 
temperance and poverty. In other words, Baker contends, women activists were early  GMAT  265 
 practitioners of nonpartisan, issue -oriented politics and thus were more interested in enlisting 
lawmakers, regardless of their party affiliation, on behalf of certai n issues than in ensuring that 
one party or another won an election. In the twentieth century, more men drew closer to 
womens ideas about politics and took up modes of issue -oriented politics that Baker sees 
women as having pioneered.  
131. The primary pur pose of the passage is to  
(A) enumerate reason why both traditional scholarly methods and newer scholarly 
methods have limitations  
(B) identify a shortcoming in a scholarly approach and describe an alternative 
approach  
(C) provide empirical data to support  a long -held scholarly assumption  
(D) compare two scholarly publications on the basis of their authors backgrounds  
(E) attempt to provide a partial answer to a long -standing scholarly dilemma  
132. The passage suggests which of the following concerning the techniques used by 
the new political historians described in the first paragraph of the passage?  
(A) They invol ved the extensive use of the biographies of political party leaders 
and political theoreticians.  
(B) They were conceived by political historians who were reacting against the 
political climates of the 1960s and 1970s . 
(C) They were of more use in analyzing  the positions of United States political 
parties in the nineteenth century than in analyzing the positions of those in 
the twentieth century.  
(D) They were of more use in analyzing the political behavior of 
nineteenth -century voters than in analyzing the political activities of those 
who could not vote during that period.  
(E) They were devised as a means of tracing the influence of nineteenth -century 
political trends on twentieth -century political trends.  
133. It can be inferred that the author of the p assage quotes Baker directly in the 
second paragraph primarily in order to  
(A) clarify a position before providing an alternative o f that position  
(B) differentiate between a novel definition and traditional definitions  
(C) provide an example of a point ag reed on by different generations of scholars  
(D) provide an example of the prose style of an important historian  
(E) amplify a definition given in the first paragraph  
134. According to the passage, Paula Baker and the new political historians of the 
1960s and 1970s shared which of the following?  
(A) A commitment to interest -group politics  
(B) A disregard for po litical theory and ideology  
(C) An interest in the ways in which nineteenth -century politics prefigured 266 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 contemporary politics  
(D) A reliance on such quantitative techniques as the analysis of election returns  
(E) An emphasis on the political involvement  of ordinary citizens  
135. Which of the following best describes the structure of the first paragraph of the 
passage?  
(A) Two scholarly approaches are compared, and a shortcoming common to both 
is identified.  
(B) Two rival schools of thought are contrasted , and a third is alluded to.  
(C) An outmoded scholarly approach is described, and a corrective approach is 
called for.  
(D) An argument is outlined, and counterarguments are mentioned.  
(E) A historical era is described in terms of its political trends.  
136. The information in the passage suggests that a pre -1960s political historian 
would have been most likely to undertake which of the following studies?  
(A) An analysis of voting tr ends among women voters of the 1920s  
(B) A study of male voters gradual ideological shift from party politics to 
issue -oriented politics  
(C) A biography of an influential nineteenth -century minister of foreign affairs  
(D) An analysis of narratives writte n by previously unrecognized women activists  
(E) A study of voting trends among naturalized immigrant laborers in a 
nineteenth -century logging camp