
The black experience, one might automatically assume, is known to every Black author. 
Henry James was pondering a similar assumption when he said: You were to suffer your fate. 
That wa s not necessarily to know it. This disparity between an experience and knowledge of 
that experience is the longest bridge an artist must cross. Don L. Lee, in his picture of the Black 
poet, studying his own poetry and the poetry of other Black poets, touches on  the crucial 
point. In order to transform his own sufferings or joys as a Black person into usable 
knowledge for his readers, the author must first order his experiences in his mind. Only then 
can he create feelingly and coherently the combination of fact and meaning that Black 
audiences require for the reexploration of their lives. A cultural community of Black authors 
studying one anothers best works systematically would represent a dynamic interchange of the 
spiritcorrective and instructive and in creasingly beautiful in its recorded expression.  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the author considers poetry to be which of 
the following?  
(A) A means of diversion in which suffering is transformed into joy  
(B) An art form that sometimes stifl es creative energy  
(C) A bridge between the mundane and the unreal  
(D) A medium for conveying important information  
(E) An area where beauty must be sacrificed for accuracy  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be LEAST likely to  
approve of which of the following?  
(A) Courses that promote cultural awareness through the study of contemporary 
art 
(B) The development of creative writing courses that encourage mutual criticism 
of student work  
(C) Growing interest in extemporaneous wri ting that records experiences as they 
occur  
(D) A shift in interest from abstract philosophical poetry to concrete 
autobiographical poetry  
(E) Workshops and newsletters designed to promote dialogues between poets  
27. The author refers to Henry James primarily in order to  
(A) support his own perception of the longest bridge (lines 6 -7) 
(B) illustrate a coherent combination of fact and m eaning (lines 14 -15) 310 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) provide an example of dynamic interchange of the spirit (line 19)  
(D) establish the pervasiveness of lack of self -knowledge  
(E) contrast Jamess ideas about poetry with those of Don L. Lee  