

 Although scientists observe  that an organism s behavior falls into rhythmic patterns, they 
disagree about how these patterns are affected when the organism is transported to a new 
environment. One experimenter, Brown, brought oysters from Connecticut waters to Illinois 
waters. She n oted that the oysters initially opened their shells widest when it was high tide in 
Connecticut, but that after fourteen days their rhythms had adapted to the tide schedule in 
Illinois. Although she could not posit an unequivocal causal relationship betwee n behavior and 
environmental change,  Brown concluded that a change in tide schedule is one of several 
possible exogenous influences (those outside the organism) on the oysters  rhythms. Another 
experimenter, Hamner, however, discovered that hamsters  from C alifornia maintain their 
original rhythms even at the South Pole. He concluded that endogenous influences (those 
inside the organism) seem to affect an organism s rhythmic behavior.  
17. All of the following could be considered examples of exogenous influen ces on an 
organism EXCEPT the influence of the  
(A) level of a hormone on a field mouse s readiness for mating  
(B) temperature of a region on a bear s hibernation  
(C) salt level of a river on a fish s migration  
(D) humidity of an area on a cat s shedding of  its fur  
(E) proximity of an owl on a lizard s searching for food  
18. Which of the following statements best describes the conclusion drawn by Brown 
(lines 14 -17) 
(A) A change in tide schedule is the primary influence on an oyster s rhythms.  
(B) A change in tid e schedule may be an important exogenous influence on an 
oyster s rhythms.  
(C) Exogenous influences, such as a change in tide schedule, seldom affect an 
oyster s rhythms.  
(D) Endogenous influences have no effect on an oyster s rhythms.  
(E) Endogenous in fluences are the only influences on an oyster s rhythms.  
19. The passage suggests that Brown s study was similar to Hamner s in which of the 
following ways?  
I. Both experimenters discovered that a new environment had a significant 
effect on an organism s behavior rhythms.  
II. Both experimenters observed an organism s behavioral rhythms after the 
organism had been transported to a new environment.  
III. Both experimenters knew an organism s rhythmic patterns in its original 
environment.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  304 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) I, II, and III  
20. Which of the following, if true, would most weaken Brown s conclusion?  
(A) The oyster gradually closed their shells after high tide in Illinois had passed.  
(B) The oysters  behavioral rhythms  maintained their adaptation to the tide 
schedule in Illinois throughout thirty days of observation.  
(C) Sixteen days after they were moved to Illinois, the oysters opened their shells 
widest when it was high tide in Connecticut.  
(D) A scientist who b rough t Maryland oysters to Maine found that the oysters 
opened their shells widest when it was high tide in Maine.  
(E) In an experiment similar to Brown s, a scientist was able to establish a clear 
causal relationship between environmental change and behavioral rhythms.  