The impressionist painters expressly disavowed any interest in philosophy, yet their new 
appro ach to art had far -reaching philosophical implications. For the view of matter that the 
Impressionists assumed differed profoundly from the view that had previously prevailed among 
artists. This view helped to unify the artistic works created in the new st yle. 
The ancient Greeks had conceived of the world in concrete terms, even endowing abstract 
qualities with bodies. This Greek view of matter persisted, so far as painting was concerned, 
into the nineteenth century. The Impressionists , on the other hand, v iewed light, not matter, as 
the ultimate  visual reality. The philosopher Taine expressed the Impressionist view of things 242 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 when he said, The chief person  in a picture is the light in which everything is bathed.  
In Impressionist painting, solid bodies be came mere reflectors of light, and distinctions 
between one object and another became arbitrary conventions; for by light all things were 
welded together . The treatment of both color and outline was transformed as well. Color, 
formerly considered a propert y inherent in an object, was seen to be merely the result of 
vibrations of light on the object s colorless surface . And outline, whose function had formerly 
been to indicate the limits of objects, now marked instead merely the boundary between units 
of pat tern, which often merged into one another.  
The Impressionist world was composed not of separate objects but of many surfaces on 
which light struck and was reflected with varying intensity to the eye through the atmosphere, 
which modified it. It was this pr ocess that produced the mosaic of colors that formed an 
Impressionist canvas. Light becomes the sole subject of the picture,  writes Mauclair. The 
interest of the object upon which it plays is secondary. Painting thus conceived becomes a 
purely optic art . 
From this profoundly revolutionary  form of art, then, all ideas religious, moral, 
psychological were excluded, and so were all emotions except certain aesthetic ones. The 
people, places, and things depicted in an Impressionist picture do not tell story or convey any 
special meaning ; they are, instead, merely parts of pattern of light drawn from nature and 
captured on canvas by the artist.  
1. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) explaining how the Impressionists were influenced  by sci entific studies of 
light and color  
(B) discussing the philosophical implications of the Impressionist  style of 
painting  
(C) identifying the revolutionary artistic techniques developed by the 
Impressionist painters  
(D) analyzing the influence  of thinkers li ke Taine and Mauclair on Impressionist  
painting  
(E) defending the importance of the Impressionist painters in the history of 
modern art  
2. According to the passage, the Impressionists differed from the ancient Greeks in 
that the Impressionists  
(A) consi dered color to be property inherent in objects  
(B) placed a higher value on the narrative element in painting  
(C) depicted the objects in a painting as isolated, rather than united in a single 
pattern  
(D) treated light, rather than matter, as the ultimate reality  
(E) regarded art primarily as a medium for expressing moral and aesthetic ideas  
3. The author s quotation of a statement by Taine (lines 15 -16) serves which of the 
following functions in the passage?   GMAT  243 
 (A) It furnishes a specific example of an Impression ist painting that features light 
as its chief subject.  
(B) It resolves an apparent contradiction in the philosophy of the Impressionists . 
(C) It qualifies the statement that the ancient Greeks viewed the world in concrete 
terms.  
(D) It summarizes the uniqu e perspective that the Impressionists brought to 
painting.  
(E) It provides a concrete illustration of the far -reaching philosophical 
implications of Impressionism.  
4. According to the passage, the I mpressionists believed that the atmosphere  
(A) reflects light with varying intensity  
(B) creates the illusion of color in colorless surfaces  
(C) modifies the shapes of objects  
(D) is the result of vibrations of light  
(E) affects the way we perceived color  
5. The author s use of the term mosaic of colors  (line 32) suggests that 
Impressionist paintings were charac terized by  
(A) discontinuous dabs of unmixed pigment  
(B) broad, sweeping brush strokes  
(C) clearly defined forms and objects  
(D) subjects devoid of emotive or literary qualities  
(E) the glowing reds, greens, and midnight blues of stained glass  
6. The pa ssage contains information that answers which of the following questions?  
I. How did the Impressionists perceive matter?  
II. What is the unifying element in a typical Impressionist painting?  
II. How did the Impressionists  view of color differ from that of  
eighteenth -century artists?  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
7. The ideas attributed to the Impressionists in the passage suggest that an 
Impressionist painter would be most likely to agree with which of the following 
statement?  
(A) A picture is significant primarily as a manifestation of the artist s mental state.  
(B) The highest purpose of art is to teach religious truths.  244 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) The quality of a picture has nothing to do with the nature of the objects it 
depicts.  
(D) An artist should strive to recreate on canvas the inner nature of objects from  
real life.  
(E) It is futile to attempt to paint pictures that aim to copy the optical appearance 
of the world.