Kazuko Nakanes history of the early Japanese immigrants to central Californias Pajaro 
Valley focuses on the development of farming communities there from 1890 to 1940. Th e Issei 
(first-generation immigrants) were brought into the Pajaro Valley to raise sugar beets. Like Issei 
laborers in American cities, Japanese men in rural areas sought employment via the boss 
system. The system comprised three elements: immigrant wage  laborers; Issei boardinghouses  
where laborers stayed; and labor contractors, who gathered workers for a particular job and 
then negotiated a contract between workers and employer. This same system was originally 
utilized by the Chi nese laborers who had preceded the Japanese. A related institution was the 
labor club, which provided job information and negotiated employment contracts and other 
legal matters, such as the rental of land, for Issei who chose to belong and paid an annua l fee 
to the cooperative for membership.  
When the local sugar beet industry collapsed in 1902, the Issei began to lease land from 
the valleys strawberry farmers. The Japanese provided the labor and the crop was divided 
between laborers and landowners. The  Issei thus moved quickly from wage -labor employment 
to sharecropping  agreements. A limited amount of economic progress was made as some Issei 
were able to rent or buy farmland directly, while others joined together to form farming 
corporations. As the Issei began to operate farms, they began to marry and start families, 
forming an established Japanese American community. Unfortunately, the Isseis efforts to 
attain agricultural independence were hampered by government restrictions, suc h as the Alien 
Land Law of 1913. But immigrants could circumvent such exclusionary laws by leasing or 
purchasing land in their American -born childrens names.  
Nakanes case study  of one rural Japanese American community provides valuable 
information about the lives and experiences of the Issei. It is, however, too particularistic . This 
limitation derives from Nakanes methodology that of oral history which cannot substitute for 
a broader theoretical or comparative perspective. Future research might well consider two 
issues raised by her study: were the Issei of the Pajaro Vall ey similar to or different from Issei in 
urban settings, and what variations existed between rural Japanese American communities?  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) defend a controversial hypothesis presented in a history of early Japanese 
immigrants to California  
(B) dismiss a history of an early Japanese settlement in California as narrow and 
ill constructed  
(C) summarize and critique a history of an early Japanese settlement in California  
(D) compare a history of one Japanese American commun ity with studies of 
Japanese settlements throughout California  
(E) examine the differences between Japanese and Chinese immigrants to central 
California in the 1890s  
2. Which of the following best describes a labor club, as defined in the passage?  
(A) An organization to which Issei were compelled to belong if t hey sought 92 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 employment in the Pajaro Valley  
(B) An association whose members included labor contractors and landowning 
bosses  
(C) A type of farming corporation set up by Issei who had resided in the Pajaro 
Valley for some time  
(D) A cooperative associatio n whose members were dues -paying Japanese 
laborers  
(E) A social organization to which Japanese laborers and their families belonged  
3. Based on information in the passage, which of the following statements 
concerning the Alien Land Law of 1913 is most accurate?  
(A) It excluded American -born citizens of  Japanese ancestry from landownership.  
(B) It sought to restrict the number of foreign immigrants to California.  
(C) It successfully prevented Issei from ever purchasing farmland.  
(D) It was applicable to first -generation immigrants but not to their 
Americ an-born children.  
(E) It was passed under pressure from the Pajaro Valleys strawberry farmers.  
4. Several Issei families join together to purchase a strawberry field and the 
necessary farming equipment. Such a situation best exemplifies which of the 
following, as it is  described in the passage?  
(A) A typical sharecropping agreement  
(B) A farming corporation  
(C) A labor club  
(D) The boss system  
(E) Circumvention of the Alien Land Law  
5. The passage suggests that which of the following was an indirect consequence o f 
the collapse of the sugar beet industry in the Pajaro Valley?  
(A) The Issei formed a permanent, family -based community.  
(B) Boardinghouses were built to accommodate the Issei.  
(C) The Issei began to lease land in their childrens names.  
(D) The Issei ado pted a labor contract system similar to that used by Chinese 
immigrants.  
(E) The Issei suffered a massive dislocation caused by unemployment.  
6. The author of the passage would most likely agree that which of the following, if 
it had been included in Nakanes study, would best remedy the particularistic 
nature of that study ? 
(A) A statistical table comparing per capita income of Issei wage laborers and 
sharecroppers in the Pajaro Valley  
(B) A statistical table showing per capita income of Issei in the Pajaro Valley from  GMAT  93 
 1890 to 19 40 
(C) A statistical table showing rates of f arm ownership by Japanese Americans in 
four central California counties from 1890 to 19 40 
(D) A discussion of original company documents dealing with the Pajaro Valley 
sugar beet industry at the turn of the century  
(E) Transcripts of interviews conducted with members of the Pajaro Valley 
Japanese American community who were born in the 1920s and 1930s  
7. It can be inferred from the passage that, when the Issei began to lease land from 
the Valleys strawberry fa rmers, the Issei most probably did which of the 
following?  
(A) They used profits made from selling the strawberry crop to hire other Issei.  
(B) They negotiated such agricultural contracts using the boss system.  
(C) They paid for the use of the land with a share of the strawberry crop.  
(D) They earned higher wages than when they raised sugar beets.  
(E) They violated the Alien Land Law.