The settlement of the United States has occupied  traditional historians since 1893 when 
Frederick Jackson Turner developed his Frontier Thesis , a thesis  that explained American 
development in terms of westward expansion. From the perspective of womens history, 
Turners exclusively masculine assumptions constitute a major drawback: his defenders and 
critics alike have reconstructed mens, not womens, liv es on the frontier. However, precisely 
because of this masculine orientation, revising the Frontier Thesis  by focusing on womens 
experience introduces new themes into womens history woman as lawmaker and 
entrepreneur and, consequently, new interpretation s of womens relationship to capital, labor, 
and statute.  
Turner claimed that the frontier produced the individualism that is the hallmark of 
American culture, and that this individualism in turn promoted democratic institutions and 
economic equality. He a rgued for the frontier as an agent of social change. Most novelists and 
historians writing in the early to midtwentieth century who considered women in the West, 
when they considered women at all, fell under Turners spell . In their works these authors 
tended to glorify womens contributions to frontier life. Western women, in Turnerian tradition, 
were a fiercely independent, capable, and durable lot, free from  the constraints binding their 
eastern sisters. This interpretation implied that the West provided a congenial environment 
where women could aspire to their own goals, free from constrictive stereotypes and sexist  
attitudes. In T urnerian terminology, the frontier had furnished a gate of escape from the 
bondage of the past.  
By the middle of the twentieth century, the Frontier Thesis  fell into  disfavor among 
historians. Later, Reactionist writers took  the view that frontier women were lonely, displaced 
persons in a hostile milieu that intensified the worst aspects of gender relations. The 
renaissance of the feminist movement during the 1970s led to the Stasist school, which 
sidestepped the good bad di chotomy and argued that frontier women lived lives similar to the 
live of women in the East. In one now -standard text, Faragher demonstrated the persistence of 76 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 the cult of true womanhood and the illusionary quality of change on the westward journey. 
Recently the Stasist position has been revised but not entirely discounted by new research.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) provide a framework within which the history of women in 
nineteenth -century America can be organized  
(B) discuss diverge nt interpretations of womens experience on the western 
frontier  
(C) introduce a new hypothesis about womens experience in nineteenth -century 
America  
(D) advocate an empirical approach to womens experience on the western 
frontier  
(E) resolve ambiguities in several theories about womens experience on the 
western frontier  
2. Which of the following can be inferred about the novelists and historians 
mentioned in lines 19 -20? 
(A) They misunderstood the po werful influence of constrictive stereotypes on 
women in the East.  
(B) They assumed that the frontier had offered more opportunities to women than 
had the East.  
(C) They included accurate information about womens experiences on the 
frontier.  
(D) They unde restimated the endurance and fortitude of frontier women.  
(E) They agreed with some of Turners assumptions about frontier women, but 
disagreed with other assumptions that he made.  
3. Which of the following, if true, would provide additional evidence for the 
Stasists argument as it is described in the passag e? 
(A) Frontier women relied on smaller support groups of relatives and friends in 
the West than they had in the East.  
(B) The urban frontier in the West offered more occupational opportunity than the 
agricultural frontier offered.  
(C) Women participated m ore fully in the economic decisions of the family group 
in the West than they had in the East.  
(D) Western women received financial compensation for labor that was 
comparable to what women received in the East.  
(E) Western women did not have an effect on divorce laws, but lawmakers in the 
West were more responsive to womens concerns than lawmakers in the East 
were.  
4. According to the passage, Turner makes which of the following connections in 
his Frontier T hesis?   GMAT  77 
 I. A connection between American individualism and economic equality  
II. A connection between geographical expansion and social change  
III. A connection between social change and financial prosperity  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only 
(D) I and  II only 
(E) I, II and III 
5. It can be inferred that which of the following statements is consistent with the 
Reactionist position as it is described in the passage?  
(A) Continuity, not change, marked womens lives as they moved from East to 
West.  
(B) Womens experience on the North American frontier has not received enough 
attention from modern historians.  
(C) Despite its rigors, the frontier offered women opportunities that had not been 
available in the East.  
(D) Gender relations were more difficult for women  in the West than they were in 
the East.  
(E) Women on the North American frontier adopted new roles while at the same 
time reaffirming traditional roles.  
6. Which of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A current interpretation of a phenomenon is described and the n ways in which 
it was developed are discussed.  
(B) Three theories are presented and then a new hypothesis that discounts those 
theories is described.  
(C) An important theory and its effects are discussed and then ways in which it 
has been revised are desc ribed.  
(D) A controversial theory is discussed and then viewpoints both for and against it 
are described.  
(E) A phenomenon is described and then theories concerning its correctness are 
discussed.  
7. Which of the following is true of the Stasist School as it is described in the 
passage?  
(A) It provides new interpretations of womens relationship to work and  the law.  
(B) It resolves some of the ambiguities inherent in Turnerian and Reactionist 
thought.  
(C) It has recently been discounted by new research gathered on womens 
experience.  
(D) It avoids extreme positions taken by other writers on womens history.  78 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) It was the first school of thought to suggest substantial revisions to the 
Frontier Thesis .