In choosing a method for determining climatic conditions that existed in the past, 
paleoc limatologists invoke four principal criteria. First, the material rocks, lakes, vegetation, 
etc.on which the method relies must be widespread enough to provide plenty of information, 
since analysis of material that is rarely encountered will not permit co rrelation with other 
regions or with other periods of geological history. Second, in the process of formation, the 
material must have received an environmental signal that reflects a change in climate and that 
can be deciphered by modern physical or chemic al means. Third, at least some of the material 
must have retained the signal unaffected by subsequent changes in the environment. Fourth, it 
must be possible to determine the time at which the inferred climatic conditions held. This last 
criterion is more easily met in dating marine sediments, because dating of only a small number 
of layers in a marine sequence allows the age of other layers to be estimated fairly reliably by 
extrapolation and interpolation. By contrast, because sedimentation is much less c ontinuous in 
continental regions, estimating the age of a continental bed from the known ages of beds 
above and below is more risky.  
One very old method used in the investigation of past climatic conditions involves the 
measurement of water levels in ancie nt lakes. In temperate regions, there are enough lakes for 
correlations between them to give us a reliable picture. In arid and semiarid regions, on the 
other hand, the small number of lakes and the great distances between them reduce the 
possibilities for  correlation. Moreover, since lake levels are controlled by rates of evaporation as 
well as by precipitation, the interpretation of such levels is ambiguous. For instance, the fact 
that lake levels in the semiarid southwestern United States appear to have been higher during 
the last ice age than they are now was at one time attributed to increased precipitation. On the 
basis of snow -line elevations, however, it has been concluded that the climate then was not 
necessarily wetter than it is now, but rather th at both summers and winters were cooler, 
resulting in reduced evaporation.  
Another problematic method is to reconstruct former climates on the basis of pollen 
profiles. The type of vegetation in a specific region is determined by identifying and counting 
the various pollen grains found there. Although the relationship between vegetation and 
climate is not as direct as the relationship between climate and lake levels, the method often 
works well in the temperate zones. In arid and semiarid regions in which t here is not much 
vegetation, however, small changes in one or a few plant types can change the picture 
dramatically, making accurate correlations between neighboring areas difficult to obtain.  
1. Which of the following statements about the difference betwe en marine and 
continental sedimentation is supported by information in the passage?  
(A) Data provided by dating marine sedimentation is more consistent with 
researchers findings in other disciplines than is data provided by dating 
continental sedimentatio n. 
(B) It is easier to estimate the age of a layer in a sequence of continental 
sedimentation than it is to estimate the age of a layer in a sequence of marine 
sedimentation.   GMAT  71 
 (C) Marine sedimentation is much less widespread than continental 
sedimentation.  
(D) Researchers are more often forced to rely on extrapolation when dating a 
layer of marine sedimentation than when dating a layer of continental 
sedimentation.  
(E) Marine sedimentation is much more continuous than is continental 
sedimentation.  
2. Which of the following statements best describes the organization of the passage 
as a whole?  
(A) The author describes a method for determining past climatic conditio ns and 
then offers specific examples of situations in which it has been used.  
(B) The author discusses the method of dating marine and continental sequences 
and then explains how dating is more difficult with lake levels than with 
pollen profiles.  
(C) The author describes the common requirements of methods for determining 
past climatic conditions and then discusses examples of such methods.  
(D) The author describes various ways of choosing a material for determining 
past climatic conditions and then discuss es how two such methods have 
yielded contradictory data.  
(E) The author describes how methods for determining past climatic conditions 
were first developed and then describes two of the earliest known methods.  
3. It can be inferred from the passage that  paleoclimatologists have concluded which 
of the following on the basis of their study of snow -line elevations in the 
southwestern United States?  
(A) There is usually more precipitation during an ice age because of increased 
amounts of evaporation.  
(B) The re was less precipitation during the last ice age than there is today.  
(C) Lake levels in the semiarid southwestern United States were lower during the 
last ice age than they are today.  
(D) During the last ice age, cooler weather led to lower lake levels t han 
paleoclimatologists had previously assumed.  
(E) The high lake levels during the last ice age may have been a result of less 
evaporation rather than more precipitation.  
4. Which of the following would be the most likely topic for a paragraph that 
logically continues the passage?  
(A) The kinds of plants normally found in arid regions  
(B) The effect of variation in lake levels on pollen distribution  
(C) The material best suited to preserving signals of climatic changes  
(D) Other criteria invoked by pale oclimatologists when choosing a method to 
determine past climatic conditions  72 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) A third method for investigating past climatic conditions  
5. The author discusses lake levels in the southwestern United States in order to  
(A) illustrate the mechanics of the relationship between lake level, evaporation, 
and precipitation  
(B) prov ide an example of the uncertainty involved in interpreting lake levels  
(C) prove that there are not enough ancient lakes with which to make accurate 
correlations  
(D) explain the effects of increased rates of evaporation on levels of precipitation  
(E) su ggest that snow -line elevations are invariably more accurate than lake 
levels in determining rates of precipitation at various points in the past  
6. It can be inferred from the passage that an environmental signal found in 
geological material would not be useful to paleoclimatologists if it  
(A) had to be interpreted by modern chemical means  
(B) reflected a change in climate rather than a long -term climatic condition  
(C) was incorporated into a material as the material was forming  
(D) also reflected subseque nt environmental changes  
(E) was contained in a continental rather than a marine sequence  
7. According to the passage, the material used to determine past climatic conditions 
must be widespread for which of the following reasons?  
I. Paleoclimatologists need to make comparisons between periods of 
geological history.  
II. Paleoclimatologists need to compare materials that have supported a wide 
variety of vegetation.  
III. Paleoclimatologists need to make comparisons with data collected in other 
regions.  
(A) I only 
(B) II only 
(C) I and II only 
(D) I and III only 
(E) II and III only 
8. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about the study of past 
climates in arid and semiarid regions?  
(A) It is sometimes more difficult to determine past climatic conditions in arid 
and semiarid regions than in temperate regions.  
(B) Although in the past more research has been done on temperate regions, 
paleoclimatologists have recently turned their attention to arid and semiarid 
regions.  
(C) Although more information about past climates can be gathered in arid a nd  GMAT  73 
 semiarid than in temperate regions, dating this information is more difficult.  
(D) It is difficult to study the climatic history of arid and semiarid regions 
because their climates have tended to vary more than those of temperate 
regions.  
(E) The study of past climates in arid and semiarid regions has been neglected 
because temperate regions support a greater variety of plant and animal life.