In reaction to a rigid, overrefined classical curriculum, some educational  philosophers have 252 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 swung sharply to an espousal of life experience  as the sole source of learning. Using their 
narrow interpretation of John Dewey s theories for support and spouting  such phrases as 
Teach the child, not the subject,  they deman d an end to rigorous study and insist that only 
through doing can learning take place. While not all adherents to this philosophy would totally 
eliminate the study of great books, the gradual subordination of literature in the school 
curriculum  reflects th eir influence.  
What is the purpose of literature? Why read if life alone is to be our teacher? James Joyce 
tells us that the artist reveals the human condition by re -creating life out of life; Aristotle, that 
art presents universal truths because its form is taken from nature. Thus, consciously or 
otherwise, great writers extend our understanding of ourselves and our world. We can soar 
with them to the heights of aspiration or plummet  with them to the depths of despair. How 
much wider is the understanding w e gain from reading than from viewing life through the 
keyhole of our individual experience . 
This function of literature, the enlarging of our life sphere, is of major importance in itself. 
Additionally, however, literature suggests solutions to social pro blems. The overweening 
ambitions of political leaders and their sneering contempt for the law did not appear for the 
first time in the writings of Bernstein and Woodward. The problems and behavior of the 
guilt-ridden did not await the appearance of the bea rded psychoanalysts of the nineteenth 
century.  
Federal Judge Learned Hand wrote, I venture to believe that it is as important to a judge 
called upon to pass on a question of constitutional law, to have at least a bowing acquaintance  
with Thucydides, Gibbon, and Carlyle, with Homer, Dante, Shakespeare, and Milton, with 
Montaigne and Rabelais, with Plato, Bacon, Hume, and Kant, as with the books which have 
been specifically written on the subject. For in such matters everythi ng turns upon the spirit in 
which he approaches  the questions before him.  
How do we overcome our dissenter? We must start with the field of agreement: the belief 
that education should serve to improve the individual and society. We must persuade our 
dissenters that the voices of human experience stretch our human faculties and open us to 
learning. We must convince them of the unity of life and art. We must prove to them that far 
from being separate, literature  is that part of life that illumines life.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) list the writers who make up the backbone of a great literature curriculum  
(B) explain the function of literature  
(C) advocate the adoption of a new philosophy of education  
(D) plead for the retention of great li terature as a fundamental part of the school 
curriculum  
(E) overcome the opposition of Dewey s followers  to the inclusion of 
contemporary literature in the curriculum  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that the author considers those who believe in 
life experience  as the sole source of learning  (line 3) to be  
(A) practical   GMAT  253 
 (B) progressive  
(C) misguided  
(D) inflexible  
(E) ignorant  
3. Based on the information in the passage, with which of the following statements 
about education would John Dewey be most likely to agree?  
(A) Education should be a con tinuous reconstruction of living experience, with 
the child the center of concern.  
(B) Education is the imparting of knowledge, not the drawing out of what is 
already in the child.  
(C) Though rigid, the classical curriculum has served us well for centuries  and 
should be restored.  
(D) The purpose of education is to correct the inequalities brought about by the 
rise of civilization.  
(E) Children should be taught only the skills and knowledge  they need to get 
ahead.  
4. The author implies that children who learn exclusively by doing are likely to  
(A) be good problem solvers but poor judges  
(B) be more guilt -ridden than those who lea rn both by doing and reading  
(C) have below -average reading skills  
(D) believe that art has nothing to do with life  
(E) have a myopic view of themselves and the world  
5. Which of the following best describes the organization of the third paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) An idea is reiterated, a new idea is introduced, and two supporting examples 
are given.  
(B) The preceding paragraph is summarized and conclusions are drawn.  
(C) A new idea is introduced, the idea is qualified, and the implications of the 
idea are analyzed.  
(D) The main idea of the preceding paragraph is restated, and evidence is given to 
support  it. 
(E) Two functions of literature are identified, and an example of each is given.  
6. The author quotes Judge Learned Hand (lines 32 -41 primarily in order to  
(A) call attention to the writing of Thucydides  and Carlyle  
(B) support the point that literatur e broadens the reader s understanding  
(C) point out that constitutional law is a part of the great literature of the past  
(D) show that everyone, including judges, enjoys reading  
(E) give specific examples of writers who have suggested solutions to soci al 254 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 problems  
7. Which of the following could best be substituted for the words the subject  (line 
39) in the quotation from Judge Hand without altering the meaning of the 
quotation?  
(A) The question of constitutional law before the judge  
(B) The contempt o f political leaders for the law  
(C) Social problems  
(D) The liberal arts, specifically history, literature, and philosophy  
(E) The human condition  
8. The passage supplies information to suggest that the author and the educational 
philosophers mentioned in the first paragraph would agree that  
(A) learning is the key to adaptability  in an ever -changing  environment  
(B) the traditional classroom should be transformed into a learning laboratory  
(C) the purpose of education is to improve society as well as the individual  
(D) one must know history in order to understand the present and the future  
(E) the primary aim of education is the transmission of culture  
9. It can be inferred from the passage that the author makes which of the following  
assumptions about his readers?  
(A) They believe that schools should reflect society.  
(B) They believe  that the subje ct, not the child, should be taught.  
(C) They favor a return to the classical curriculum.  
(D) They share his view that the study of great books is essential to education.  
(E) They believe that only through reading can learning take place.