Since the late 1970s, in the face of a severe loss of market share  in dozens of industries, 
manufacturers in the United States have been trying to improve productivity and therefore 
enhance their international competitiveness through cost -cutting programs. (Cost -cutting 
here is defined as raising labor  output while holding the amount of labor constant.) However, 
from 1978 through 1982, productivity the value of goods manufactured divided by the amount 
of labor input did not improve; and while the results were better in the business upturn of the 
three y ears following, they ran 25 percent lower than productivity improvements during earlier, 
post-1945 upturns. At the same time, it became clear that the harder manufactures worked to 
implement cost -cutting, the more they lost their competitive edge.  
With thi s paradox in mind, I recently visited 25 companies; it became clear to me that the 
cost-cutting approach to increasing productivity is fundamentally flawed. Manufacturing 
regularly observes a 40, 40, 20 rule. Roughly 40 percent of any manufacturing -based  
competitive advantage derives from long -term changes in manufacturing structure  (decisions 
about the number, size, location, and capacity of facilities) and in approaches to materials. 
Another 40 percent comes from major changes in equipment and process t echnology. The final 
20 percent rests on implementing conventional cost -cutting. This rule does not imply that 
cost-cutting should not be tried. The well -known tools of this approach including simplifying 
jobs and retraining employees to work smarter, not harder do produce results. But the tools 
quickly reach the limits of what they can contribute.  
Another problem is that the cost -cutting approach hinders innovation and discourages 
creative people. As Abernathys study of automobile manufacturers has shown,  an industry can 
easily become prisoner of its own investments in cost -cutting techniques, reducing its ability to 
develop new products. And managers under pressure to maximize cost -cutting will resist 
innovation because they know that more fundamental cha nges in processes or systems will 
wreak  havoc with the results on which they are measured. Production managers have always 
seen their job as one of minimizing costs and maximizing output. This dimension of 
performance has  until recently sufficed as a basis of evaluation, but it has created a 
penny -pinching , mechanistic culture in most factories that has kept away creative managers.  
Every company I know that has freed itself from the paradox has done so, in part, by 
developing and implementing a manufacturing strategy. Such a strategy focuses on the 
manufacturing structure and on equipment and process technology. In one company a 
manufacturing strategy that allowed different areas of the factory to spe cialize in different 
markets replaced the conventional cost -cutting approach; within three years the company 
regained its competitive advantage. Together with such strategies, successful companies are 74 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 also encouraging managers to focus on a wider set of ob jectives besides cutting costs. There is 
hope for manufacturing, but it clearly rests on a different way of managing.  
1. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) summarizing a thesis  
(B) recommending a different approach  
(C) comparing poin ts of view  
(D) making a series of predictions  
(E) describing a number of paradoxes  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that the manufactu rers mentioned in line 2 
expected that the measures they implemented would  
(A) encourage innovation  
(B) keep labo r output constant  
(C) increase their competitive advantage  
(D) permit business upturns to be more easily predicted  
(E) cause managers to focus on a wider set of objectives  
3. The primary function of the first paragraph of the passage is to  
(A) outline i n brief the authors argument  
(B) anticipate challenges to the prescriptions that follow  
(C) clarify some disputed definitions of economic terms  
(D) summarize a number of long -accepted explanations  
(E) present a historical context for the authors obser vations  
4. The author refers to Abernathys study (line 36) most probably in order to  
(A) qualify an observation about one rule governing manufacturing  
(B) address possible objections to a recommendation about improving 
manufacturing competitiveness  
(C) su pport an earlier assertion about one method of increasing productivity  
(D) suggest the centrality in the United States economy of a particular 
manufacturing industry  
(E) given an example of research that has questioned the wisdom of revising a 
manufacturing strategy  
5. The authors attitude toward the culture in most factories is best described as  
(A) cautious  
(B) critical  
(C) disinterested  
(D) respectful  
(E) ad ulatory   GMAT  75 
 6. In the passage, the author includes all of the following EXCEPT  
(A) personal observation  
(B) a business principle  
(C) a definition of productivity  
(D) an example of a successful company  
(E) an illustration of a process technology  
7. The autho r suggests that implementing conventional cost -cutting as a way of 
increasing manufacturing competitiveness is a strategy that is  
(A) flawed and ruinous  
(B) shortsighted and difficult to sustain  
(C) popular and easily accomplished  
(D) useful but inadequate  
(E) misunderstood but promising