Woodrow Wilson was referring to the liberal idea of the economic market when he said that 
the free enterprise system is the most efficient economic system. Maximum freedom means 
maximum prod uctiveness; our openness is to be the measure of our stability. Fascination with 
this ideal has made Americans defy the Old World categories of settled possessiveness versus  
unsettling deprivation, the cupidity of retention versus  the cupidity of seizu re, a status quo 
defended or attacked. The United States, it was believed, had no status quo ante . Our only 
station was the turning of a stationary wheel, spinning faster and faster. We did not base our 
system on property but opportunity which meant we  based it not on stability but on mobility. 
The more things changed, that is, the more rapidly the wheel turned, the steadier we would be. 
The conventional picture of class politics is composed of the Haves, who want a stability to keep 
what they have, and  the Have -Nots, who want a touch of  instability and change in which to 
scramble for  the things they have not. But Americans imagined a condition in which speculators, 
self-makers, runners  are always using the ne w opportunities given by our land. These economic 
leaders  (front-runners) would thus be mainly agents of change . The nonstarters were 
considered the ones who wanted stability, a strong referee to give them some position in the 
race, a regulative hand to ca lm manic speculation; an authority that can call things to a halt, 
begin things again from compensatorily staggered starting lines.  
Reform in America has been sterile because it can imagine no change except through the 
extension of this metaphor of a r ace, wider inclusion of competitors, a piece of the action, as 
it were, for the disenfranchised. There is no attempt to call off the race. Since our only stability 
is change, America seems not to honor the quiet work that achieves social interdependence and 
stability. There is, in our legends, no heroism of the office clerk , no stable industrial work force 
of the people who actually make the system work. There is no pride in being an employee 
(Wilson asked for a return to the time when everyone was an employer). There has been no 
boasting about our social workers they are  merely signs of the systems failure, of opportunity 
denied or not taken, of things to be eliminated. We have no pride in our growing 
interdependence, in the fact that our system can serve others, that we are able to help those in 
need; empty boasts from the past make us ashamed of our present achievements, make us try 
to forget or deny them, move away from them. There is no honor but in the Wonderland  race 
we must all run, all trying to win, none winning in the end (for there is no end).  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) criticize the inflexibility of American economic mythology  
(B) contrast Old World and New World economic ide ologies  
(C) challenge the integrity of traditional political leaders  
(D) champion those Americans whom the author deems to be neglected  
(E) suggest a substitute for the traditional metaphor of a race  
2. According to the passage, Old World values were based on   GMAT  5 
 (A) ability  
(B) property  
(C) family connections  
(D) guild hierarchies  
(E) education  
3. In the context of the authors discussion of regulating change, which of the 
following could be most probably regarded as a strong referee ( line 30 ) in the 
United States?  
(A) A school principal  
(B) A political theorist  
(C) A federal court judge  
(D) A social worker  
(E) A government inspector  
4. The author sets off  the word Ref orm ( line 35 ) with quotation marks in order to  
(A) emphasize its departure from the concept of settled possessiveness  
(B) show his support for a systematic program of change  
(C) underscore the flexibility and even amorphousness o f United States society  
(D) indicate that the term was one of Wilsons favorites  
(E) assert that reform in the United States has not been fundamental  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that the author most probably thinks that 
giving the disenfranchised a piece of the action ( line 38 ) is 
(A) a compas sionate, if misdirected, legislative measure  
(B) an example of Americans resistance to profound social change  
(C) an innovative program for genuine social reform  
(D) a monument to the efforts of industrial reformers  
(E) a surprisingly Old World remed y for social ills  
6. Which of the following metaphors could the author most appropriately use to 
summarize his own assessment of the American economic system ( lines 35 -60)? 
(A) A windmill  
(B) A waterfall  
(C) A treadmill  
(D) A gyro scope  
(E) A bellows  
7. It can be inferred from the passage that Woodrow Wilsons ideas about the 
economic market  
(A) encouraged those who make the system work ( lines 45 -46) 
(B) perpetuated traditional legends about America  6 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) rev ealed the prejudices of a man born wealthy  
(D) foreshadowed the stock market crash of 1929  
(E) began a tradition of presidential proclamations on economics  
8. The passage contains information that would answer which of the following 
questions?  
I. What t echniques have industrialists used to manipulate a free market?  
II. In what ways are New World and Old World economic policies similar?  
III. Has economic policy in the United States tended to reward independent 
action?  
(A) I only 
(B) II only 
(C) III only 
(D) I and II only 
(E) II and III only 
9. Which of the following best expresses the authors main point?  
(A) Americans pride in their jobs continues to give them stamina today.  
(B) The absence of a status quo ante  has undermined United States economic 
structure.  
(C) The  free enterprise system has been only a useless concept in the United 
States . 
(D) The myth of the American free enterprise system is seriously flawed.  
(E) Fascination with the ideal of openness has made Americans a progressive 
people.