Most large corporations in the United States were once run by individual capitalists who 
owned enough stock to dominate the board of directors  and dictate  company policy. Because 
putting such large amounts of stock on the market would only depress its value, they could not 
sell out  for a quick profit and instead had to concentrate on improving the long -term 
productivity of their com panies. Today, with few exceptions, the stock of large United States 
corporations is held by large institutions pension funds, for example and because these 
institutions are prohibited by antitrust laws from owning a majority of a company s stock and 
from actively influencing a company s decision -making, they can enhance their wealth only by 
buying and selling stock in anticipation of fluctuations in its value. A minority shareholder is 
necessarily a short term trader. As a result, United States productivit y is unlikely to improve 
unless shareholders and the managers of the companies in which they invest are encouraged to 
enhance long -term productivity (and hence long -term profitability), rather than simply to 
maximize short -term profits.  
Since the return of  the old -style capitalist is unlikely, today s short -term traders must be 
remade into tomorrow s long -term capitalistic investors. The legal limits that now prevent 
financial institutions from acquiring a dominant shareholding position in a corporation sho uld be 
removed, and such institutions  encouraged to take a more active role in the operations of the 
companies in which they invest. In addition, any institution that holds twenty percent or more 
of a company s stock should be forced to give  the public one day s notice of the intent to sell 
those shares. Unless the announced sale could be explained to the public on grounds other 
than anticipated future losses, the value of the stock would plummet and, like the old -time 
capitalists, major inve stors could cut their losses only by helping to restore their companies  
productivity. Such measures would force financial institutions to become capitalists whose 
success depends not on trading shares at the propitious moment, but on increasing the 
produc tivity of the companies in which they invest.  
1. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with doing which of the 
following?  
(A) Comparing two different approaches to a problem  202 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) Describing a problem and proposing a solution  
(C) Defending an est ablished method  
(D) Presenting data and drawing conclusions from the data  
(E) Comparing two different analyses of a current situation  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following is true of majority 
shareholders in a corporation?  
(A) They make the corporation s operational management decisions.  
(B) They  are not allowed to own more than fifty percent of the corporation s 
stock.  
(C) They cannot make quick profits by selling their stock in the corporation.  
(D) They are more interested in profits than in productivity.  
(E) They cannot sell any of their sto ck in the corporation without giving the 
public advance notice.  
3. According to the passage, the purpose of the requirement suggested in lines 30 -33 
would be which of the following?  
(A) To encourage institutional stockholders to sell stock that they believ e will 
decrease in value  
(B) To discourage institutional stockholders from intervening in the operation of a 
company whose stock they own  
(C) To discourage short -term profit -taking by institutional stockholders  
(D) To encourage a company s employees to tak e an active role in the ownership 
of stock in the company  
(E) To encourage investors to diversify their stock holdings  
4. Which of the following best explains the author s statement that A minority 
shareholder is necessarily a short -term trader  (lines  15-16)? 
(A) The only way a minority shareholder can make money from stocks is to buy 
and sell stocks as prices fluctuate over short periods of time.  
(B) Only a shareholder who owns a majority of a company s stock can influence 
the trading price of the sto ck over a long period of time.  
(C) A minority shareholder is prohibited by law from buying stock and holding it 
for long -term profits.  
(D) Large institutions like pension funds cannot legally own a majority of any 
corporation s stock.  
(E) A minority shareholder rarely takes an interest in the decisions of a 
corporation s board of directors.  
5. The author suggests that which of the following is a true statement about people 
who typify the old style capitalist  referred to in line 23 ? 
(A) They now rely on outdated management techniques.   GMAT  203 
 (B) They seldom engaged in short -term trading of the stock they owned.  
(C) They did not influence the investment policies of the corporations in which 
they invested.  
(D) They now play a much smaller ro le in the stock market as a result of  antitrust 
legislation.  
(E) They were primarily concerned with maximizing the short -term profitability 
of the corporations in which they owned stock.