The delegates to the Constitutional Convention were realists. They knew that the greatest  
battles would take place after the convention, once the Constitution had already been drafted 
and signed. The delegates had overstepped  their bounds. Instead of amending the Articles of 
Confederation by which the American states had previously been governed, they had proposed 
an entirely new government. Under these circumstances , the convention was understandably 
reluctant to submi t its work to the Congress for approval.  
Instead, the delegates decided to pursue what amounted to a revolutionary course. They 
declared that ratification of the new Constitution by nine states would be sufficient to establish 
the new government. In other words, the Constitution was being submitted directly to the 
people. Not even the Congress, which had called the convention, would be asked to approve its 
work.  
The leaders of the convention shrewdly wished to bypass the state legislatures, which were 
attached to states  rights and which required in most cases the agreement of two houses. For 
speedy ratification of the Constitution, the single -chambered, specially elected state ratifying 
conventions offered the greatest promise of agreement . 
Battle lines wer e quickly drawn. The Federalists, as the supporters of the Constitution were 
called, had one solid advantage: they came with a concrete proposal. Their opponents, the 
Antifederalists, came with none. Since the Antifederalists were opposing something with 
nothing, their objections, though sincere, were basically negative. They stood for a policy of 
drift while the Federalists were providing clear leadership.  
Furthermore, although the Antifederalists claimed to be the democratic group, their 
opposition to the  Constitution did not necessarily spring from a more democratic view of 
government. Many of the Antifederalists were as distrustful of the common people as their 
opponents. In New York, for example, Governor George Clinton criticized the people for their 
fickleness and their tendency to vibrate from one extreme to another.  Elbridge  Gerry of 
Massachusetts, who refused to sign the Constitution, asserted that the evils we experience 
flow from  the excess of democracy,  and John F . Mercer of Maryland professed little faith in his 
neighbors as voters when he said that the people cannot know and judge the character of 
candidates . 
1. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) contrasting the opposing sides in a battle  
(B) analyzing the effects of an event  
(C) urging a reassessment of history  
(D) criticizing the opponents of a plan  
(E) describing the background  of conflict  
2. According to the passage, the delegates to the Constitutional Convention did not 
submit their work to Congress for approval because  
(A) they knew that most members  of congress would want to broaden the power s 
of the national government  258 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) it was unclear whether Congress had the legal right to offer or withhold such 
approval  
(C) they considered it more democratic to appeal directly to the citizens of the 
separate states  
(D) they believed that Congress  would n ot accept the sweeping changes they had 
proposed  
(E) Congress was dominated by a powerful group of Antifederalist leaders  
3. According to the passage, in contrast to most state legislatures, state ratifying 
conventions were  
(A) elected  
(B) unicameral  
(C) characterized by strong leadership  
(D) nearly unanimous in their support of the new Constitution  
(E) opposed to states  rights  
4. The author characterizes the leaders of the Constitutional Convention as  
(A) shrewd and visionary  
(B) liberal and enlightened  
(C) radical and idealistic  
(D) clever and p ragmatic  
(E) eloquent and persuasive  
5. In stating that the Antifederalists were opposing something with nothing  (line 
28), the author suggests that the Antifederalists  
(A) based most of their arguments on their antidemocratic sentiments  
(B) lacked le aders who were as articulate as the Federalist leaders  
(C) were unable to rally significant support for their position among the populace  
(D) had few reasonable arguments  to put forth in support of their position  
(E) offered no alternative plan of gover nment of their own  
6. Which of the following statements about Elbridge Gerry can be inferred from the 
passage ? 
(A) He was a delegate to the Massachusetts state ratifying convention.  
(B) He was a delegate to the Constitutional Convention.  
(C) He was the arc hitect of the policy of drift  (line 30) advocated by the 
Antifederalists.  
(D) He claimed to have a more democratic view of government than the 
Federalists.  
(E) He was one of the leaders of the Antifederalist Party.  
7. The author s quotation of John F. Mercer (lines 43 -45) serves which of the  GMAT  259 
 following functions in the passage?  
(A) It summarizes the last paragraph.  
(B) It furnishes a concrete example.  
(C) It articulates the main point of the passage.  
(D) It clarifies the preceding quotation.  
(E) It expresses a general conclusion.  
8. Which of the following would be the most appropriate title for the passage ? 
(A) Divided Leadership at the Constitutional Co nvention  
(B) How the Constitution Became Law  
(C) The U.S. Constitution: Its Strengths and Weaknesses  
(D) The Battle for Ratification of the Constitution  
(E) The Views of the Antifederalists on Democracy  
 OG 17Passages