GMAT  17 
 Between the eighth and eleventh centuries A. D., the Byzantine Empire staged  an almost 
unparalleled economic and cul tural revival, a recovery that is all the more striking because it 
followed a long period of severe internal decline. By the early eighth century, the empire had 
lost roughly two -thirds of the territory it had possessed in the year 600, and its remaining a rea 
was being raided by Arabs and Bulgarians, who at times  threatened to take Constantinople and 
extinguish the empire altogether. The wealth of the state and its subjects was greatly 
diminished, and artistic and literary production had virtually ceased. By the early eleventh 
century, however, the empire had regained almost half of its lost possessions, its new frontiers 
were secure, and its influence extended far beyond its borders. The economy had recovered, 
the treasury was full, a nd art and scholarship had advanced.  
To consider the Byzantine military, cultural, and economic advances as differentiated 
aspects of a single phenomenon is reasonable. After all, these three forms of progress have 
gone together in a number of states and c ivilizations. Rome under Augustus and fifth -century 
Athens provide the most obvious examples in antiquity. Moreover, an examination of the 
apparent sequential connections among military, economic, and cultural forms of progress 
might help explain the dynam ics of historical change.  
The common explanation of these apparent connections in the case of Byzantium would 
run like this: when the empire had turned back enemy raids on its own territory and had begun 
to raid and conquer enemy territory, Byzantine resou rces naturally expanded and more money 
became available to patronize art and literature. Therefore, Byzantine military achievements led 
to economic advances, which in turn led to cultural revival.  
No doubt this hypothetical pattern did apply at times durin g the course of the recovery. Yet 
it is not clear that military advances invariably came first , economic advances second, and 
intellectual advances third. In the 860s the Byzantine Empire began to recover from Arab 
incursions so that by 872 the military b alance with the Abbasid Caliphate had been permanently 
altered in the empires favor. The beginning of the empires economic revival, however, can be 
placed between 810 and 830. Finally, the Byzantine revival of learning appears to have begun 
even earlier.  A number of notable scholars and writers appeared by 788 and, by the last decade 
of the eighth century, a cultural revival was in full bloom , a revival that lasted until the fall of 
Constantinople in 1453. Thus the commonly expected order of military revival followed by 
economic and then by cultural recovery was reversed in Byzantium. In fact, the revival of 
Byzantine learning may it self have influenced the subsequent economic and military expansion.  
1. Which of the following best states the central idea of the passage?  
(A) The Byzantine Empire was a unique case in which the usual order of military 
and economic revival preceding cultu ral revival was reversed.  
(B) The economic, cultural, and military revival in the Byzantine Empire between 
the eighth and eleventh centuries was similar in its order to the sequence of 
revivals in Augustan Rome and fifth  century Athens.  
(C) After 810 Byzan tine economic recovery spurred a military and, later, cultural 
expansion that lasted until 1453.  
(D) The eighth -century revival of Byzantine learning is an inexplicable 
phenomenon, and its economic and military precursors have yet to be 18 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 discovered.  
(E) The revival of the Byzantine Empire between the eighth and eleventh 
centuries shows cultural rebirth preceding economic and military revival, the 
reverse of the commonly accepted order of progress.  
2. The primary purpose of the second paragraph is which of  the following?  
(A) To establish the uniqueness of the Byzantine revival  
(B) To show that Augustan Rome and fifth -century Athens are examples of 
cultural, economic, and military expansion against which all subsequent 
cases must be measured  
(C) To suggest t hat cultural, economic , and military advances have tended to be 
closely interrelated in different societies  
(D) To argue that, while the revivals of Augustan Rome and fifth -century Athens 
were similar, they are unrelated to other historical examples  
(E) To indicate that, wherever possible, historians should seek to make 
comparisons with the earliest chronological examples of revival  
3. It can be inferred from the passage that by the eleventh century the Byzantine 
military forces  
(A) had reached their pea k and begun to decline  
(B) had eliminated the Bulgarian army  
(C) were comparable in size to the army of Rome under Augustus  
(D) were strong enough to withstand the Abbasid Caliphates military forces  
(E) had achieved control of Byzantine governmental structures  
4. It can be inferred from the passage that the Byzantine Empire sustained 
significant territorial losses  
(A) in 600  
(B) during the seventh century  
(C) a century after the cultural achieveme nts of the Byzantine Empire had been 
lost 
(D) soon after the revival of Byzantine learning  
(E) in the century after 8 73 
5. In the third paragraph, the author most probably provides an explanation of the 
apparent connections among economic, military, and  cultural development in 
order to  
(A) suggest that the process of revival in Byzantium accords with this model  
(B) set up an order of events that is then shown to be not generally applicable to 
the case of Byzantium  
(C) cast aspersions on traditional histo rical scholarship about Byzantium  
(D) suggest that Byzantium represents a case for which no historical precedent  GMAT  19 
 exists  
(E) argue that military conquest is the paramount element in the growth of 
empires  
6. Which of the following does the author mention as crucial evidence concerning 
the manner in which the Byzantine revival began?  
(A) The Byzantine military revival of t he 860s led to economic and cultural 
advances.  
(B) The Byzantine cultural revival lasted until 1453.  
(C) The Byzantine economic recovery began in the 900s.  
(D) The revival of Byzantine learning began toward the end of the eighth century.  
(E) By the ea rly eleventh century the Byzantine Empire had regained much of its 
lost territory.  
7. According to the author, The common explanation ( line 28 ) of connections 
between economic, military, and cultural development is  
(A) revolutio nary and too new to have been applied to the history of the 
Byzantine Empire  
(B) reasonable, but an antiquated theory of the nature of progress  
(C) not applicable to the Byzantine revival as a whole, but does perhaps 
accurately describe limited periods dur ing the revival  
(D) equally applicable to the Byzantine case as a whole and to the history of 
military, economic, and cultural advances in ancient Greece and Rome  
(E) essentially not helpful, because military, economic, and cultural advances are 
part of  a single phenomenon