Although numbers of animals in a given region may fluctuate from year to year, the 
fluctuations are often temporary and, over long periods, trivial. Scientists have advanced three 
theories of population control to account for this relative constancy.  
The first theory attributes a relatively constant population to periodic climatic catastrophes 
that decimate populations with such frequency as to prevent them from exceeding some 
particular limit. In the case of small organisms with short life cycles, climatic changes need not 
be catastrophic: normal seasonal changes in photoperiod (daily amount of sunlight), for 
example, can govern population growth. This theory the density -independent view asserts 
that climatic factors exert the same regulatory effect on population regardless of the number of 
individuals in a region.  
A second theory argues that population growth is primarily density -dependent that is, the 
rate of gr owth of a population in a region decreases as the number of animals increases. The 
mechanisms that manage regulation may vary. For example, as numbers increase, the food 
supply would probably diminish, which would increase mortality. In addition, as Lotka and 
Volterra have shown, predators can find prey more easily in high -density populations. Other 
regulators include physiological control mechanisms: for example , Christian and Davis have 
demonstrated how the crowding that results from a rise in numbers may  bring about hormonal 
changes in the pituitary and adrenal  glands that in turn may regulate population by lowering 
sexual activity and inhibiting sexual maturation. There is evidence that these effects may 
persist for three generations in the absence of th e original provocation. One challenge for 
density -dependent theorists is to develop models that would allow the precise prediction of the 
effects of crowding.  
A third theory, proposed by Wynne -Edwards and termed epideictic , argues that 
organisms have evo lved a code in the form of social or epideictic behavior displays, such as 
winter -roosting aggregations or group vocalizing; such codes provide organisms with 
information on population size in a region so that they can, if necessary, exercise reproductiv e  GMAT  143 
 restraint. However, Wynne -Edwards theory, linking animal social behavior and population 
control, has been challenged, with some justification, by several studies.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) argue against those scientists who maintai n that animal populations tend to 
fluctuate  
(B) compare and contrast the density -dependent and epideictic theories of 
population control  
(C) provide example of some of the ways in which animals exercise reproductive 
restraint to control their own numbers  
(D) suggests that theories of population control that concentrate on the social 
behavior of animals are more open to debate than are theories that do not  
(E) summarize a number of scientific theories that attempt to explain why animal 
populations do not exceed certain limits  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that proponents of the density -dependent 
theory of population control have not yet been able to  
(A) use their theory to explain the population growth of organisms with short life 
cycles  
(B) repro duce the results of the study of Christian and Davis  
(C) explain adequately why the numbers of a population can increase as the 
populations rate of growth decreases  
(D) make sufficiently accurate predictions about the effects of crowding  
(E) demonstrate how predator populations are themselves regulated  
3. Which of the following, if true, would best support the density -dependent theory 
of population control as it is described in the passage?  
(A) As the number of foxes in Minnesota decre ase, the growth rate of this 
population of foxes begins to increase.  
(B) As the number of woodpeckers in Vermont decreases, the growth rate of this 
population of woodpeckers also begins to decrease.  
(C) As the number of prairie dogs in Oklahoma increases, the growth rate of this 
population of prairie dogs also begins to increase.  
(D) After the number of beavers in Tennessee decreases, the number of predators 
of these beavers begins to increase.  
(E) After the number of eagles in Montana decreases, the food supply of this 
population of eagles also begins to decrease.  
4. According to the Wynne -Edwards theory as it is described in the passage, 
epideictic behavior displays serve the function of  
(A) determining roosting aggregations  
(B) locating food  
(C) attracting predators  144 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) regulating sexual activity  
(E) triggering hormonal changes  
5. The challenge posed to the Wynne -Edwards -theory by several studies is regarded 
by the author with  
(A) comple te indifference  
(B) qualified acceptance  
(C) skeptical amusement  
(D) perplexed astonishment  
(E) agitated dismay  
6. Which of the following statements would provide the most of logical 
continuation of the final paragraph of the passage?  
(A) Thus Wynne -Edwards theory raises serious questions about the constancy of 
animal population in a region.  
(B) Because Wynne -Edwards theory is able to explain more kinds of animal 
behavior than is the density -dependent theory, epideictic explanations of 
population regul ation are now widely accepted.  
(C) The results of one study, for instance, have suggested that group vocalizing is 
more often used to defend territory than to provide information about 
population density.  
(D) Some of these studies have, in fact, worked out  a systematic and complex 
code of social behavior that can regulate population size.  
(E) One study, for example, has demonstrated that birds are more likely to use 
winter -roosting aggregations than group vocalizing in order to provide 
information on pop ulation size.