Although genetic mutations in bacteria and viruses can lead to epidemics, some epidemics 
are caused by bacteria and viruses that have unde rgone no significant genetic change. In 
analyzing the latter, scientists have discovered the importance of social and ecological factors to 
epidemics. Poliomyelitis , for example, emerged as an epidemic in the United State s in the 
twentieth century; by then , modern sanitation was able to delay exposure to polio until 
adolescence or adulthood, at which time polio infection produced paralysis. Previously, infection 
had occurred during infancy, when it typically provided lifelong immunity without paralysis. 
Thus, the hygiene that helped prevent typhoid epidemics indirectly fostered a paralytic polio 
epidemic. Another example is Lyme disease, which is caused by bacteria that are transmitted by 
deer ticks. It occurred only sporadically during the late nineteenth century but has recently 
become prevalent in parts of the United States, largely due to an increase in the deer 
population that occurred simultaneously with the growth of the suburbs and inc reased outdoor 
recreational activities in the deers habitat. Similarly, an outbreak of dengue hemorrhagic fever 
became an epidemic in Asia in the 1950s because of ecological changes that caused Aedes 136 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 aegypti , the mosquito that transmits the dengue virus,  to proliferate . The stage is now set in 
the United States for a dengue epidemic because of the inadvertent introduction and wide 
dissemination of another mosquito, Aedes  albopictus . 
1. The passage suggests that a lack of modern sanitation would make which  of the 
following most likely to occur?  
(A) An outbreak of Lyme disease  
(B) An outbreak of dengue hemorrhagic fever  
(C) An epidemic of typhoid  
(D) An epidemic of paralytic polio among infants  
(E) An epidemic of paralytic polio among adolescents and adul ts 
2. According to the passage, the outbreak of dengue hemorrhagic fever in the 1950s 
occurred for which of the following reasons?  
(A) The mosquito Aedes aegypti  was newly introduced into Asia.  
(B) The mosquito Aedes aegypti became more numerous.  
(C) The mosquito Aedes albopictus  became infected with the dengue virus.  
(D) Individuals who would normally acquire immunity to the dengue virus as 
infants were not infected until later in life.  
(E) More people began to visit and inhabit areas in which mosquitoes live and 
breed.  
3. It can be inferred from the passage that Lyme disease has become prevalent in 
parts of the United States because of which of the following?  
(A) The inadvertent intr oduction of Lyme disease bacteria to the United States  
(B) The inability of modern sanitation methods to eradicate Lyme disease bacteria  
(C) A genetic mutation in Lyme disease bacteria that makes them more virulent  
(D) The spread of Lyme disease bacteria f rom infected humans to noninfected 
humans  
(E) An increase in the number of humans who encounter deer ticks  
4. Which of the following can most reasonably be concluded about the mosquito 
Aedes albopictus on the basis of information given in the passage?  
(A) It is native to the United States.  
(B) It can proliferate only in Asia.  
(C) It transmits the dengue virus.  
(D) It caused an epidemic of dengue hemorrhagic fever in the 1950s.  
(E) It replaced Aedes aegypti  in Asia when ecological changes altered Aedes 
aegypti s habitat.  
5. Which of the foll owing best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A paradox is stated, discussed and left unresolved.   GMAT  137 
 (B) Two opposing explanations are presented, argued, and reconciled.  
(C) A theory is proposed and is then followed by descriptions of three 
experi ments that support the theory.  
(D) A generalization is stated and is then followed by three instances that support 
the generalization.  
(E) An argument is described and is then followed by three counterexamples that 
refute the argument.  
6. Which of the following, if true, would most strengthen the authors assertion 
about the cause of the Lyme disease outbreak in the United States?  
(A) The deer population was smaller in the late nineteenth century than in the 
mid-twentieth century.  
(B) Interest in outdoor recreation began to grow in the late nineteenth century.  
(C) In recent years the suburbs have stopped growing.  
(D) Outdoor recreation  enthusiasts routinely take measures to protect themselves 
against Lyme disease.  
(E) Scientists have not yet developed a vaccine that can prevent Lyme disease.