Nearly a century ago, biologists found that if they separated an invertebrate animal embryo 
into two parts at an early stage of its life, it would survive and develop as tw o normal embryos. 
This led them to believe that the cells in the early embryo are undetermined in the sense that 
each cell has the potential to develop in a variety of different ways. Later biologists found that 
the situation was not so simple. It matters in which plane the embryo is cut. If it is cut in a plane 
different from the one used by the early investigators, it will not form two whole embryos.  
A debate arose over what exactly was happening. Which embryo cells are determined, just 
when do they  becom e irreversibly committed to their fates, and what are the morphogenetic 
determinants that tell a cell what to become? But the debate could not be resolved because no 
one was able to ask the crucial questions in a form in which they could be pursued produ ctively. 
Recent discoveries in molecular biology, however, have opened up prospects for a resolution of 
the debate. Now investigators think they know at least some of the molecules that act as 
morphogenetic determinants in early development. They have been  able to show that, in a 
sense, cell determination begins even before an egg is fertilized.  
Studying sea urchins , biolog ist Paul Gross found that an unfertilized egg contains 
substances that function as morphogenetic determinants. They are located in the cytoplasm of 
the egg cell; i.e., in that part of the cells protoplasm that lies outside of the nucleus. In the 
unfertili zed egg, the substances are inactive and are not distributed homogeneously. When the 
egg is fertilized, the substances become active and, presumably, govern the behavior of the 
genes they interact with. Since the substances are unevenly distributed in the egg, when the 
fertilized egg divides, the resulting cells are different from the start and so can be qualitatively 
different in their own gene activity.  
The substances that Gross studied are maternal messenger RNAs products of certain of 
the maternal gene s. He and other biologists studying a wide variety of organisms have found 
that these particular RNAs direct, in large part, the synthesis of histones, a class of proteins 
that bind to DNA. Once synthesized, the histones move into the cell nucleus, where section of 
DNA wrap around them to form a structure that resembles beads, or knots, on a string. The 
beads are DNA segments wrapped around the histones; the string is the intervening DNA. And 
it is the structure of these beaded DNA strings that guide the f ate of the cells in which they are 
located.  
1. The passage is most probably directed at which kind of audience?  
(A) State legislators deciding about funding levels for a state -funded biological 
laboratory  
(B) Scientists specializing in molecular genetics  
(C) Readers of an alumni newsletter published by the college that Paul Gross 
attended  
(D) Marine biologists studying the processes that give rise to new species  
(E) Undergraduate biology majors in a molecular biology course  38 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 2. It can be inferred from the  passage that the morphogenetic determinants present 
in the early embryo are  
(A) located in the nucleus of the embryo cells  
(B) evenly distributed unless the embryo is not developing normally  
(C) inactive until the embryo cells become irreversibly committe d to their final 
function  
(D) identical to those that were already present in the unfertilized egg  
(E) present in larger quantities than is necessary for the development of a single 
individual  
3. The main topic of the passage is  
(A) the early development of embryos of lower marine organisms  
(B) the main contribution of modern embryology to molecular  biology  
(C) the role of molecular biology in disproving older theories of embryonic 
development  
(D) cell determination as an issue in the study of embryonic development  
(E) scientific dogma as a factor in the recent debate over the value of molecular 
biology  
4. According to the passage, when biologists believed that the cells in the early 
embryo were undetermined, they made which of the following mistakes?  
(A) They did not attempt to replicate the original experiment of separating an 
embryo into two par ts. 
(B) They did not realize that there was a connection between the issue of cell 
determination and the outcome of the separation experiment.  
(C) They assumed that the results of experiments on embryos did not depend on 
the particular animal species used for such experiments.  
(D) They assumed that it was crucial to perform the separation experiment at an 
early stage in the embryos life.  
(E) They assumed that different ways of separating an embryo into two parts 
would be equivalent as far as the fate of  the two parts was concerned.  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that the initial production of histones after an 
egg is fertilized takes place  
(A) in the cytoplasm  
(B) in the maternal genes  
(C) throughout the protoplasm  
(D) in the beaded portions of t he DNA strings  
(E) in certain sections of the cell nucleus  
6. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following is dependent on 
the fertilization of an egg?   GMAT  39 
 (A) Copying of maternal genes to produce maternal messenger RNAs  
(B) Synthesis of proteins call ed histones  
(C) Division of a cell into its nucleus and the cytoplasm  
(D) Determination of the egg cells potential for division  
(E) Generation of all of a cells morphogenetic determinants  
7. According to the passage, the morphogenetic determinants pre sent in the 
unfertilized egg cell are which of the following?  
(A) Proteins bound to the nucleus  
(B) Histones  
(C) Maternal messenger RNAs  
(D) Cytoplasm  
(E) Nonbeaded intervening DNA  
8. The passage suggests that which of the following plays a role in det ermining 
whether an embryo separated into two parts will develop as two normal embryos?  
I. The stage in the embryos life at which the separation occurs  
II. The instrument with which the separations is accomplished  
III. The plane in which the cut is made t hat separates the embryo  
(A) I only  
(B) II only 
(C) I and II only 
(D) I and III only 
(E) I, II, and III 
9. Which of the following circumstances is most comparable to the impasse 
biologists encountered in trying to resolve the debate about cell determination 
(lines 12 -18)? 
(A) The problems faced by a literary scholar who wishes to use o riginal source 
materials that are written in an unfamiliar foreign language  
(B) The situation of a mathematician who in preparing a proof of a theorem for 
publication detects a reasoning error in the proof  
(C) The difficulties of a space engineer who has t o design equipment to function 
in an environment in which it cannot first be tested  
(D) The predicament of a linguist trying to develop a theory of language 
acquisition when knowledge of the structure of language itself is 
rudimentary at best  
(E) The dilemma confronting a foundation when the funds available to it are 
sufficient to support one of two equally deserving scientific projects but not 
both 40 GMAT, GRE, LSAT 