(This passage was written in 1984.)  
It is now possible to hear a recording of Carusos singing that is fa r superior to any made 
during his lifetime. A decades -old wa x-cylinder recording of this great operatic tenor has been 
digitized, and the digitized signal has been processed by computer to remove the extraneous 
sound, or noise, introduced by the now anc ient wax -cylinder recording process.  
Although this digital technique needs improvements, it represents a new and superior way 
of recording and processing sound which overcomes many of the limitations of analog 
recording. In analog recording systems, the o riginal sound is represented as a continuous 
waveform created by variations in the sounds amplitude over time. When analog playback 
systems reproduce this waveform, however, they invariably introduce distortions. First, the 
waveform produced during playba ck differs somewhat from the original waveform. Second, the 
medium that stores the analog recording creates noise during playback which gets added to the 
recorded sounds.  
Digital recordings, by contrast, reduce the original sound to a series of discrete nu mbers 
that represent the sounds waveform. Because the digital playback system reads only 
numbers, any noise and distortion that may accumulate during storage and manipulation of the 
digitized signal will have little effect: as long as the numbers remain  recognizable, the original 
waveform will be reconstructed with little loss in quality. However, because the waveform is 
continuous, while its digital representation is composed of discrete numbers, it is impossible for 
digital systems to avoid some distor tion. One kind of distortion, called sampling error, occurs if 
the sound is sample d (i.e., its amplitude is measured) too infrequently, so that the amplitude 
changes more than one quantum (the smallest change in amplitude measured by the digital 
system) between samplings. In effect, the sound is changing too quickly for the system to 
record it accurately. A second form of distortion is quantizing error, which arises when the 
amplitude being measured is not a whole number of quanta, forcing the digital r ecorder to 
round off. Over the long term, these errors are random, and the noise produced (a background 
buzzing) is similar to analog noise except that it only occurs when recorded sounds are being 
reproduced.  
272. Which of the following best describes the  relationship of the first paragraph to the 
passage as a whole?  
(A) The first paragraph introduces a general thesis that is elaborated on  in detail 
elsewhere in the passage.  
(B) The first paragraph presents a concrete instance of a problem that is discussed 
elsewhere in the passage.  
(C) The first paragraph describes a traditional process that is contrasted 
unfavorably with a newer proc ess described elsewhere in the passage.  
(D) The first paragraph presents a dramatic example of the potential of a process 
that is described elsewhere in the passage.  
(E) The first paragraph describes a historic incident that served as the catalyst for 
developments described elsewhere in the passage.   GMAT  287 
 273. According the passage, one of the ways in which analog recording systems differ 
from digital recording systems is that analog systems  
(A) can be used to reduce background noise in old recordings  
(B) reco rd the original sound as a continuous waveform  
(C) distort the original sound somewhat  
(D) can avoid introducing extraneous and nonmusical sounds  
(E) can reconstruct the original waveform with little loss in quality  
274. Which of the following statements about the numbers by which sound is 
represented in a digital system can be inferred from the passage?  
(A) They describe the time interval betwe en successive sounds in a passage of 
music.  
(B) They model large changes in the amplitude of the initial sound with relatively 
poor precision.  
(C) They are slightly altered each time they are read by the playback apparatus.  
(D) They are not readily altered  by distortion and noise accumulated as the digital 
signal is stored and manipulated.  
(E) They are stored in the recording medium in small groups that can be read 
simultaneously by the playback apparatus.  
275. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about the digital 
approach to the processing of sound?  
(A) It was develo ped in competition with wax -cylinder recording technology.  
(B) It has resulted in the first distortion -free playback system.  
(C) It has been extensively applied to nonmusical sounds.  
(D) It cannot yet process music originally recorded on analog equipment.  
(E) It is not yet capable of reprocessing old recordings in a completely 
distortion -free manner.