Excess inventory, a massive  problem for many busin esses, has several causes, some of 
which are unavoidable. Overstocks may accumulate through production overruns  or errors. 
Certain styles and colors prove unpopular. With some products computers and s oftware, toys, 
and books last years models are difficult to move even at huge discounts. Occasionally the 
competition introduces a better product. But in many cases the publics buying tastes simply 
change, leaving a manufacturer or distributor with thous ands (or millions) of items that the 
fickle public no longer wants.  
One common way to dispose of  this merchandise is to sell it to a liquidator, who buys as 
cheaply as possible and then resells the merchandise through catalogs, discount stores, and 
other outlets . However, liquidators may pay less for the merchandise than it cost to make it. 
Another way to dispose of excess inventory is to dump it. The corporation takes a straight cost 
write-off on its taxes and hauls the merchandise to a landfill. Although it is hard to believe, 
there is a sort of convoluted logic to this approach. It is perfectly legal, requires little time or 
preparation on the compan ys part, and solves the problem quickly. The drawback is the remote 
possibility of getting caught by the news media. Dumping perfectly useful products can turn 
into a public relations nightmare. Children living in poverty are freezing and XYZ Company has 
just sent 500 new snowsuits  to the local dump. Parents of young children are barely getting by 
and Q RS Company dumps 1,000 cases of disposable diapers because they have slight 
imperfections.  
The managers of these companies are not deliberately wasteful; they are simply unawar e 
of all their alternatives. In 1976 the Internal Revenue Service provided a tangible incentive for 
businesses to contribute their products to charity. The new tax law allowed corporations to 
deduct the cost of the product donated plus half the difference between cost and fair market 
selling price, with the proviso that deductions cannot exceed twice cost. Thus, the federal 
government sanctions indeed, encourages an above -cost federal tax deduction for 
companies that donate inventory to charity.  
1. The auth or mentions each of the following as a cause of excess inventory 
EXCEPT  
(A) production of too much merchandise  118 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) inaccurate forecasting of buyers preferences  
(C) unrealistic pricing policies  
(D) products rapid obsolescence  
(E) availability of a bett er product  
2. The passage suggests that which of the following is a kind of product that a 
liquidator who sells to discount stores would be unlikely to wish to acquire?  
(A) Furniture  
(B) Computers  
(C) Kitchen equipment  
(D) Baby -care products  
(E) Childre ns clothing  
3. The passage provides information that supports which of the following 
statements?  
(A) Excess inventory results most often from insufficient market analysis by the 
manufacturer.  
(B) Products with slight manufacturing defects may contribute t o excess 
inventory.  
(C) Few manufacturers have taken advantage of the changes in the federal tax 
laws.  
(D) Manufacturers who dump their excess inventory are often caught and 
exposed by the news media.  
(E) Most products available in discount stores have come from manufacturers 
excess -inventory stock.  
4. The author cites the examples in lines 25 -29 most probably in order to illustrate  
(A) the fiscal irresponsibility of dump ing as a policy for dealing with excess 
inventory  
(B) the waste -management problems that dumping new products creates  
(C) the advantages to the manufacturer of dumping as a policy  
(D) alternatives to dumping explored by different companies  
(E) how the n ews media could portray dumping to the detriment of the 
manufacturers reputation  
5. By asserting that manufacturers are simply unaware ( line 31 ), the author 
suggests which of the following?  
(A) Manufacturers might donate exces s inventory to charity rather than dump it if 
they knew about the provision in the federal tax code.  
(B) The federal government has failed to provide sufficient encouragement to 
manufacturers to make use of advantageous tax policies.  
(C) Manufacturers who choose to dump excess inventory are not aware of the  GMAT  119 
 possible effects on their reputation of media coverage of such dumping.  
(D) The manufacturers of products disposed of by dumping are unaware of the 
needs of those people who would find the products usefu l. 
(E) The manufacturers who dump their excess inventory are not familiar with the 
employment of liquidators to dispose of overstock.  
6. The information in the passage suggests that which of the following, if true, 
would make donating excess inventory to charity less attractive to manufacturers 
than dumping?  
(A) The costs of getting the inventory to the charitable destination are greater 
than the above -cost tax deduction.  
(B) The news media give manufacturers charitable contributions the same 
amount of co verage that they give dumping.  
(C) No straight -cost tax benefit can be claimed for items that are dumped.  
(D) The fair -market value of an item in excess inventory is  5 times its cost.  
(E) Items end up as excess inventory because of a change in the publics 
preferences.  
7. Information in the passage suggests that one reason manufacturers might take 
advantage of the tax provision mentioned in the last paragraph is that  
(A) there are m any kinds of products that cannot be legally dumped in a landfill  
(B) liquidators often refuse to handle products with slight imperfections  
(C) the law allows a deduction in excess of the cost of manufacturing the product  
(D) media coverage of contribution s of excess -inventory products to charity is 
widespread and favorable  
(E) no tax deduction is available for products dumped or sold to a liquidator