Historians have long thought that America was, from the beginning, profoundly influenced 
by the Lockean notion of liberty, with its str ong emphasis on individual rights and self -interest. 
Yet in his recent book, historian J. G. A. Pocock argues that early American culture was actually 
rooted in the writings of Machiavelli, not Locke. The implications of this substitution are 
important: if  Pocock s argument is right, then Americans may not be  as deeply individualistic 
and capitalistic as many believe.  
Pocock argues that out of the writings of antiquity Machiavelli created a body of political 
thinking called classical republicanism.  This b ody of thought revived the ancient belief that a 
human being was by nature a citizen who achieved moral fulfillment by participating in a 
self-governing republic. Liberty was interpreted as a condition that is realized when people are 
virtuous and are will ing to sacrifice their individual interests for the sake of the community. To 
be completely virtuous, people had to be independent and free of the petty interests of the 
marketplace. The greatest enemy of virtue was commerce. This classical republican trad ition is 
said by Pocock to have shaped the ideology of America during the eighteenth century.  
Many events in early American history can be reinterpreted in light of Pocock s analysis. 
Jefferson is no longer seen as a progressive reader of Locke leading Ame rica into its 
individualistic future; instead Jefferson is understood as a figure obsessed with virtue and 
corruption and fearful  of new commercial developments. Influenced by Pocock, some historians 
have even argued that a communitarian and precapitalist mentality was pervasive among the 
eighteenth -century farmers of America.  
Yet Pocock s thesis and the reinterpretation of the history of eighteenth -century America 
engendered by it are of dubious validity. If Americans did believe in the ideals of classical  virtue 
that stressed civic duty and made the whole community greater than its discrete parts, then 
why did the colonists lack a sense of obligation to support the greater good of the British 
Empire? If indeed America  has not always been the society of ind ividual rights and self -interest 
that it is today, how and when did it be  come so? Classical republicanism is elitist, and it 
certainly had little to offer the important new social groups of artisans and shopkeepers that 
emerged in America during the eight eenth century. These middle -class radicals, for whom John 
Wilkes and Thomas Paine were spokesmen, had none of the independence from the market 
that the landed gentry had. They were less concerned with virtue and community than they 
were with equality and p rivate rights. They hated political privilege and wanted freedom from 
an elite -dominated state. In short, the United States was created not in a mood of classical 210 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 anxiety over virtue and corruption, but in a mood of liberal optimism over individual profits  and 
prosperity.  
1. Which of the following best states the author s main point?  
(A) Classical republicanism could not have been the ideological  basis of 
eighteenth -century America.  
(B) Classical republicanism  is an elitist theory that was rejected by 
eight eenth -century artisans and shopkeepers.  
(C) Pocock understates the importance of the contributions Machiavelli made to 
the formation of early American culture.  
(D) Pocock fails to capture the great extent to which eighteenth -century 
Americans were committe d to a sense of civic duty.  
(E) Pocock s account of Jefferson is incompatible with Jefferson s commitment to 
a Lockean notion of liberty.  
2. The conception of liberty that, according to Pocock, formed the basis of 
America s eighteenth -century ideology is most clearly exhibited by  which of the 
following individuals?  
(A) The merchant who rebuilds the damaged sidewalk in front of his store in 
order to avoid potential lawsuits by customers who might fall there  
(B) The professor who allows her students to help her design the content an d the 
format of the courses she teaches  
(C) The doctor who bows to government pressure and agrees to treat a small 
number of low -income patients at no cost  
(D) The lawyer who argues that a state law prohibiting smoking in public places 
unfairly encroaches on the rights of smokers  
(E) The engineer whose business suffers as a result of the personal time and 
energy he devotes to a program to clean up city streets  
3. According to the author, eighteenth -century American artisans and shopkeepers 
had little rea son to  
(A) support the political efforts of Thomas Jefferson  
(B) reject the ideals of classical virtue  
(C) embrace the principles of classical republicanism  
(D) renounce the political objectives of the British Empire  
(E) worry about increasing profits a nd maintaining general prosperity  
4. The author mentions which of the following as a fact that weakens Pocock s 
argument about the ideology of eighteenth -century America?  
(A) Jefferson s obsession with virtue and corruption and his fear of commercial 
devel opment  
(B) The precapitalist mentality that was pervasive among farmers in early 
America   GMAT  211 
 (C) The political decline of artisans and shopkeepers in eighteenth -century 
America  
(D) The colonists  lack of commitment to support the general welfare of the 
British  Empire  
(E) The existence of political privilege in early American society  
5. The passage suggests that, if classical republicanism had been the ideology of 
eighteenth -century America, which of the following would have resulted?  
(A) People would have be en motivated to open small businesses and expand 
commercial activity.  
(B) Citizens and politicians would not have been encouraged to agitate for 
increased individual rights.  
(C) People would have been convinced that by pursuing their own interests they 
were contributing to the good of the group.  
(D) The political and social privileges enjoyed by the landed gentry would have 
been destroyed.  
(E) A mood of optimism among people over individual profits and prosperity 
would have been created.  
6. The author implies that Pocock s argument about the ideology of 
eighteenth -century America would be more plausible if the argument explained 
which of  the following?  
(A) How a society that was once committed to the ideals of classical virtue could 
be transformed into a society of individual rights and self -interest  
(B) How Thomas Jefferson could have become obsessed with individual rights 
and with prosp erity and profits  
(C) Why classical republicanism had such wide appeal among those who were 
free from the demands of the marketplace  
(D) Why many colonists who embraced classical republicanism were reluctant to 
place their individual interests above those of Great Britain  
(E) Why the landed gentry in eighteenth -century America should have believed 
that moral fulfillment is achieved by participating in a self -governing 
republic  
7. According to the passage, Pocock s theory suggests that many eighteenth -century 
Americans believed that increasing commercial activity would  
(A) force the landed gentry to relinquish their vast holdings  
(B) enrich the nation and increase individual rights  
(C) cause some people to forfeit their liberty and virtue  
(D) create a mood  of optimism about national prosperity  
(E) strengthen the political appeal of middle -class radicals  
8. The author is primarily concerned with  212 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) refuting a proposed thesis about eighteenth -century America  
(B) analyzing a long -established interpretation of American history  
(C) criticizing a  set of deeply held beliefs about early American ideology  
(D) reconciling opposing interpretations of eighteenth -century American ideology  
(E) defending a novel reading of the ideology of eighteenth -century America