One of the many theories about alcoholism is the learning and re inforcement theory, which 
explains alcoholism by considering alcohol ingestion as a reflex response  to some stimulus and 
as a way to reduce an inner drive state such as fear or anxiety. Characterizing life situations in 
terms of ap proach and avoidance, this theory holds that persons tend to be drawn to pleasant 
situations and repelled by unpleasant ones. In the latter case, alcohol ingestion is said to 
reduce the tension or feelings of unpleasantness and to replace them with the fee ling of 
euphoria generally observed in most persons after they have consumed one or more drinks.  
Some experimental evidence tends to show that alcohol reduces fear in the 
approach -avoidance situation. Conger trained one group of rats to approach a food goa l and, 
using aversion conditioning, trained another group to avoid electric shock. After an injection of 
alcohol the pull away from the shock was measurable weaker, while the pull toward the food 
was unchanged.  
The obvious troubles experienced by alcoholic  persons appear to contradict the learning 
theory in the explanation of alcoholism. The discomfort, pain, and punishment they experience 
should presumably serve as a deterrent to drinking. The fact that alcoholic persons continue to 
drink in the face of fa mily discord, loss of employment, illness, and other sequels of repeated 
bouts is explained by the proximity of the drive reduction to the consumption of alcohol; that is, 
alcohol has the immediate effect  of reducing tension while the unpleasant  consequenc es of  GMAT  227 
 drunken behavior come only later. The learning paradigm, therefore , favors the establishment 
and repetition of the resort to alcohol.  
In fact, the anxieties and feelings of guilt induced by the consequences of excessive 
alcohol ingestion may themselv es become the signal for another bout of alcohol abuse. The 
way in which the cue for another bout could be the anxiety itself is explained  by the process of 
stimulus generalization: conditions or events occurring at the time of reinforcement tend to 
acquir e the characteristics of state of anxiety or fear, the emotional state itself takes on the 
properties of a stimulus, thus triggering another drinking bout.  
The role of punishment is becoming increasingly important  in formulating a cause of 
alcoholism based  on the principles of learning theory. While punishment may serve to suppress 
a response, experiments have shown that in some cases it can serve as a reward and reinforce 
the behavior . Thus if the alcoholic person has learned to drink under conditions of b oth reward 
and punishment, either type of condition  may precipitate renewed drinking.  
Ample experimental evidence supports the hypothesis that excessive alcohol consumption 
can be learned. By gradually increasing the concentration of alcohol in drinking wa ter, 
psychologists have been able to induce the ingestion of larger amounts of alcohol by an animal 
than would be normally consumed. Other researchers have been able to achieve similar results 
by varying the schedule of reinforcement that is, by requiring the animal to consume larger 
and larger amounts of the alcohol solutions before rewarding it. In this manner, animals learn to 
drink enough to become dependent on alcohol in terms of demonstrating withdrawal 
symptoms.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to 
(A) compare the learning and reinforcement theory to other theories of 
alcoholism  
(B) discuss how the behavior of alcoholic persons is explained by learning theory  
(C) argue that alcoholism is a learned behavior  
(D) explain  how fear and anxiety stimu late and reinforce drinking in alcoholic 
persons  
(E) present experimental evidence in support of the learning and reinforcement 
theory of alcoholism  
2. The passage contains information that answers which of the following questions?  
(A) What are some of the psychosocial problems associated with alcoho lism?  
(B) Which has proven more effective in the treatment of alcoholism, aversion 
conditioning or reinforcement?  
(C) Why does alcohol ingestion reduce tension and give rise to a feeling of 
euphoria in most people ? 
(D) According to the learning theory, in what cases does punishment reinforce 
rather than deter drinking in alcoholic persons?  
(E) Are some persons genetically predisposed to alcoholism?  
3. It can be inferred from the passage that aversion conditioning is based primarily 228 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 on the principle that  
(A) electric shock stimulates a response  
(B) behavior that is punished will be avoide d 
(C) pain is a stronger stimulus than pleasure  
(D) alcohol reduces fear  
(E) behavior that is rewarded will be repeated  
4. According to the passage, which of the following is true of stimulus 
generalization?  
(A) It contradicts the learning and reinforce ment theory of alcoholism.  
(B) It is the process by which an organism learns to respond to one stimulus but 
not to similar stimuli.  
(C) It supports the hypothesis that excessive alcohol consumption can be learned.  
(D) It explains why people tend to avoid b ehavior that is associated with painful 
experiences.  
(E) It occurs when the conditions associated with a stimulus come to evoke the 
same response  as the stimulus itself evokes.  
5. The author cites Conger s experiment with two groups of rats in order to  
(A) show that ingestion of alcohol does not affect a ppetite  
(B) corroborate the findings of other academic researchers  
(C) show that alcohol decreases fear  
(D) disprove the learning and reinforcement theory  
(E) convince the reader of the usefulness of behavioral research  
6. According to the passage , whic h of the following could induce an alcoholic to 
drink?  
I. The need to relieve tension  
II. Anxieties  resulting from guilt feelings about previous drinking bouts  
III. Punishment  for alcoholic behavior  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III o nly 
(E) I, II, and III  
7. The passage contains information that supports which of the following 
statements?  
(A) If the pleasurable taste of whisky leads to an acquired taste for brandy, then 
stimulus generalization  has occurred.  
(B) Slapping a child for mi sbehaving may over time encourage the child to repeat  GMAT  229 
 the misbehavior.  
(C) If a person has learned to drink under two sets of conditions, both must be 
present in order to induce that person to drink again.  
(D) Continued heavy use of alcohol usually causes severe damage to the body 
and nervous system.  
(E) When consumed in moderation, alcohol may benefit health.  
8. According to the passage, how does the behavior of alcoholics appear to 
contradict learning theory?  
(A) Learning theory holds that people are drawn by pleasant situations and 
repelled  by unpleasant ones, but in alcoholics that pattern appears to be 
reversed.  
(B) Contrary to learning theory, alcoholic persons do not respond to life situations 
in terms of approach and avoidance.  
(C) The unpleasant consequences of excessive alcoholic  consumpti on do not 
deter alcoholics from drinking, as might be predicted from learning theory.  
(D) According to learning theory, drinking is a reflex response to an external  
stimulus, but for alcoholics it is more often a way to reduce an inner drive 
such as fear.  
(E) Instead of the feeling of euphoria predicted  by learning theory, alcoholics 
frequently experience discomfort and pain after drinking.  
9. It can be inferred from the passage that the author views the learning and 
reinforcement theory of alcoholism a s 
(A) credible  
(B) unassailable  
(C) outdated  
(D) fallacious  
(E) revolutionary