For years scholars have contrasted slavery in the United States and in Brazil, stimulated b y 
the fact that racial patterns assumed such different aspects in the two countries after 
emancipation. Brazil never developed a system of rigid segregation of the sort  that replaced 
slavery in the United States, and it s racial system was fluid because its definition of race was 
based as much on characteristics such as economic status as on skin color. Until recently, the 
most persuasive explanation for these differences was that Portuguese institutions especially 
the Ro man Catholic church and Roman civil law , promoted recognition of the slave s humanity. 
The English colonists, on the other  hand, constructed their system of slavery out of whole cloth . 
There were simply no preceden ts in English common law , and separation of church and state 
barred Protestant clergy from the role that priests assumed in Brazil.  
But the assumption that institutions alone could so powerfully affect the history of two raw 
and malleable  frontier  countries seems, on reexamination, untenable. Recent studies focus 
instead on a particular set of contrasting economic circumstances and demographic profiles at 188 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 significant periods in the h istories of the two countries. Persons of mixed race quickly appeared 
in both countries. In the United States they were considered to be Black, a social definition that 
was feasible because they were in the minority. In Brazil, it was not feasible. Though 
intermarriage was illegal in both countries, the laws were unenforceable in Brazil since Whites 
formed a small minority in an overwhelmingly Black population. Manumission for persons of 
mixed race was also easier in Brazil, particularly in the nineteenth c entury when in the United 
States it was hedged about with difficulties. Furthermore, a shortage of skilled workers in Brazil 
provided persons of mixed race with the opportunity to learn crafts and trades, even before 
general emancipation, whereas in the Un ited States entry into these occupations was blocked 
by Whites sufficiently numerous to fill the posts. The consequence was the development in 
Brazil of a large class of persons of mixed race, proficient in skilled trades and crafts, who stood 
waiting as a  community for freed slaves to join.  
There should be no illusion that Brazilian society after emancipation was color -blind. Rather, 
the large population of persons of mixed race produced a racial system that included a third 
status, a bridge between the Bl ack caste and the White, which could be traversed by means of 
economic or intellectual achievement, marriage, or racial heritage. The strict and sharp line 
between the races so characteristic of the United States in the years immediately after 
emancipation  was simply absent. With the possible exception of New Orleans, no special 
place developed in the United States for persons of mixed race. Sad to say, every pressure of 
society worked to prevent their attaining anything approximating the economic and soc ial 
position available to their counterparts in Brazil.  
1. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) contrasting the systems of slavery that were established in Brazil and in the 
United States  
(B) criticizing the arguments of those scholar s who considered religion and law to 
be the determinants of the systems of slavery in Brazil and in the United 
States  
(C) describing the factors currently thought to be responsible for the differences 
in the racial patterns that evolved in Brazil and in th e United States  
(D) advocating further study of the differences between the racial systems that 
developed in Brazil and in the United States  
(E) pointing out the factors that made the status of Blacks in the United States 
lower than that of Blacks in Br azil 
2. According to the passage, early scholars explained the differences between the 
racial systems that developed in the United States and in Brazil as the result of 
which of the following factors?  
(A) Institutional  
(B) Demographic  
(C) Economic  
(D) Geog raphical  
(E) Historical   GMAT  189 
 3. In the context in which it is found, the phrase constructed their system of slavery 
out of whole cloth  (lines 15 -16) implies that the system of slavery established by 
the English settlers was  
(A) based on fabrications and lies  
(B) tailored to the settlers  particular circumstances  
(C) intended to serve the needs of a frontier economy  
(D) developed without direct influence from the settlers  religion or legal system  
(E) evolved without giving recognition to the slave s humanity  
4. The author implies that the explanation proposed by early scholars for the 
differences between the systems of slavery in the United States and in Brazil is  
(A) stimulating to historians and legal scholars  
(B) more powerful than more recent explanations  
(C) persuasive in spite of minor deficiencies  
(D) excessively legalistic in its approach  
(E) questionable in light of current scholarly work  
5. The author mentions intermarriage, manumission, and the shortage of skilled 
workers in Brazil primarily in order to establish which of the following?  
(A) The environment in which Brazil s racial sy stem developed  
(B) The influence of different legal and economic conditions in Brazil and the 
United States on the life -style of persons of mixed race  
(C) The origins of Brazil s large class of free skilled persons of mixed race  
(D) The differences between  treatment of slaves in Brazil and in the United States  
(E) The difficulties faced by persons of mixed race in the United States, as 
compared to those in Brazil  
6. According to the passage, Brazilian laws prohibiting intermarriage were 
ineffective because Brazil had a  
(A) Portuguese Catholic heritage  
(B) Sm all minority of whites  
(C) Liberal set of laws concerning manumission  
(D) Large number of freed slaves  
(E) Shortage of people in the skilled crafts and trades  
7. The use of quotation marks around the word place  (line 59 ) sug gests that the 
author intended to convey which of the following?  
(A) An ambivalent attitude toward the city of New Orleans  
(B) A negative attitude toward the role of race in determining status in the United 
States  
(C) A critical comment about the maltreatm ent of persons of mixed race in the 
United States  190 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) A double meaning, indicating both a social status and a physical location  
(E) An ambiguity, referring to either the role persons of mixed race actually 
played, or the role they were assigned by the society  
8. With which of the following statements regarding human behavior would the 
author of the passage be most likely to agr ee? 
(A) Only a fool or a political candidate would sing very loudly the glories of the 
institutions of Western culture.  
(B) Contact sports displacements of our abiding impulses to kill speak of 
essential human behavior more truthfully than all the theories  of 
psychologists and historians.  
(C) Family, church, political party: these are the strong foundations of history and 
human behavior.  
(D) Money and its pursuit: an exploration of that theme will chart accurately the 
development of civilizations and the de terminants of human behavior.  
(E) The circumstances in which humans find themselves more than treasured 
beliefs or legal prescriptions mold human behavior.