Species interdependence in nature confers many benefits on the species involved, but it 
can also become a point of weakness when one sp ecies involved in the relationship is affected 
by a catastrophe. Thus, flowering plant species dependent on insect pollination, as opposed to 
self-pollination or wind pollination, could be endangered when the population of 
insect -pollinators is depleted by  the use of pesticides.  
In the forests of New Brunswick, for example, various pesticides have been sprayed in the 
past 25 years in efforts to control the spruce budworm, an economically significant pest. 
Scientists have now investigated the effects of the spraying of Matacil, one of the anti -budworm 
agents that is least toxic to insect -pollinators. They studied Matacils effects on insect mortality 
in a wide variety of wild insect species and on plant fecundity, expressed as the percentage of 
the total flow ers on an individual plant that actually developed fruit and bore seeds. They found 
that the most pronounced mortality after the spraying of Matacil occurred among the smaller 
bees and one family of flies, insects that were all important pollinators of num erous species of 
plants growing beneath the tree canopy of forests. The fecundity of plants in one common 
indigenous species, the red -osier dogwood, was significantly reduced in the sprayed areas as 
compared to that of plants in control plots where Matacil  was not sprayed. This species is highly 
dependent on the insect -pollinators most vulnerable to Matacil. The creeping dogwood, a 
species similar to the red -osier dogwood, but which is pollinated by large bees, such as 
bumblebees, showed no significant decl ine in fecundity. Since large bees are not affected by the 
spraying of Matacil, these results a dd weight to the argument that spraying where the 
pollinators are sensitive to the pesticide used decreases plant fecundity.  
The question of whether the decrease  in plant fecundity caused by the spraying of 
pesticides actually causes a decline in the overall population of flowering plant species still 
remains unanswered. Plant species dependent solely on seeds for survival or dispersal are 
obviously more vulnerabl e to any decrease in plant fecundity that occurs, whatever its cause. If, 
on the other hand, vegetative growth and dispersal (by means of shoots or runners) are 
available as alternative reproductive strategies for a species, then decreases in plant fecundi ty 
may be of little consequence. The fecundity effects described here are likely to have the most 
profound impact on plant species with all four of the following characteristics: a short life span, 
a narrow geographic range, an incapacity for vegetative pr opagation, and a dependence on a 
small number of insect -pollinator species. Perhaps we should give special attention to the 
conservation of such plant species since they lack key factors in their defenses against the 
environmental disruption caused by pest icide use.  
1. Which of the following best summarizes the main point of the passage?   GMAT  55 
 (A) Species interdependence is a point of weakness for some plants, but is 
generally beneficial to insects involved in pollination.  
(B) Efforts to control the spruce budwor m have had deleterious effects on the 
red-osier dogwood.  
(C) The used of pesticides may be endangering certain plant species dependent on 
insects for pollination.  
(D) The spraying of pesticides can reduce the fecundity of a plant species, but 
probably does  not affect its overall population stability.  
(E) Plant species lacking key factors in their defenses against human 
environmental disruption will probably become extinct.  
2. According to the author, a flowering plant species whose fecundity has declined 
due to pesticide spraying may not experience  an overall population decline if the 
plant species can do which of the following?  
(A) Reproduce itself by means of shoots and runners.  
(B) Survive to the end of the growing season.  
(C) Survive in harsh climates.  
(D) Respond to the fecundity decline by pro ducing more flowers.  
(E) Attract large insects as pollinators . 
3. The passage suggests that the lack of an observed decline in the fecundity of the 
creeping dogwood strengthens the researchers conclusions regarding pesticide 
use because the  
(A) creeping dogwood is a specie s that does not resemble other forest plants  
(B) creeping dogwood is a species pollinated by a broader range of insect species 
than are most dogwood species  
(C) creeping dogwood grows primarily in regions that were not sprayed with 
pesticide, and so served  as a control for the experiment  
(D) creeping dogwood is similar to the red -osier dogwood, but its insect 
pollinators are known to be insensitive to the pesticide used in the study  
(E) geographical range of the creeping dogwood is similar to that of the red -osier 
dogwood, but the latter species relies less on seeds for reproduction  
4. The passage suggests that which of the following is true of the forest regions in 
New Brunswick sprayed with most anti -budworm pesticides other than Matacil?  
(A) The fecundity of some flowering plants in those regions may have decreased 
to an even greater degree than in the regions where Matacil is used.  
(B) Insect mortality in those regions occurs m ostly among the larger species of 
insects, such as bumblebees.  
(C) The number of seeds produced by common plant species in those regions is 
probably comparable to the number produced where Matacil is sprayed.  
(D) Many more plant species have become extinct  in those regions than in the 56 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 regions where Matacil is used.  
(E) The spruce budworm is under better control in those regions than in the 
regions where Matacil is sprayed.  
5. It can be inferred that which of the following is true of plant fecundity as it  is 
defined in the passage?  
(A) A plants fecundity decreases as the percentage of unpollinated flowers on the 
plant increases . 
(B) A plants fecundity decreases as the number of flowers produced by the plant 
decreases.  
(C) A plants fecundity increases as  the number of flowers produced by the plant 
increases.  
(D) A plants fecundity is usually low if the plant relies on a small number of 
insect species for pollination.  
(E) A plants fecundity is high if the plant can reproduce quickly by means of 
vegetative growth as well as by the production of seeds.  
6. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following plant species 
would be LEAST likely to experience  a decrease in fecundity as a result of the 
spraying of a pesticide not directly toxic to plants?  
(A) A flowering tree pollinated by only a few insect species  
(B) A kind of insect -pollinated vine producing few flowers  
(C) A wind -pollinated flowering tree t hat is short -lived  
(D) A flowering shrub pollinated by a large number of insect species  
(E) A type of wildflower typically pollinated by larger insects  
7. Which of the following assumptions most probably underlies the authors 
tentative recommendation in lines 51 -54? 
(A) Human activities that result in environme ntal disruption should be 
abandoned.  
(B) The use of pesticides is likely to continue into the future.  
(C) It is economically beneficial to preserve endangered plant species.  
(D) Preventing the endangerment of a species is less costly than trying to save an  
already endangered one.  
(E) Conservation efforts aimed at preserving a few well -chosen species are more 
cost-effective than are broader -based efforts to improve the environment.