Traditionally, the first firm to commercialize a new technology has benefited from the 
unique opportunity to shape product definitions, forcing followers t o adapt to a standard or 
invest in an unproven alternative. Today, however, the largest payoffs  may go to companies that 
lead in developing integrated approaches for successful mass production and distribution.  
Producers of the Beta format for videocassette recorders (VCRs), for example, were first to 
develop the VCR commercially in 1975, but producers of the rival VHS (Video Home System) 
format proved to be more successful at forming strategic alliances with other produc ers and 
distributors to manufacture and market their VCR format . Seeking to maintain exclusive control 
over VCR distribution , Beta producers were reluctant to form such alliances and eventually lost 
ground to VHS in the competition for the global VCR marke t. 
Despite Betas substantial technological head start  and the fact that VHS was neither 
technically better nor cheaper than Beta, developers of VHS quickly turned a slight early lead in 
sales into a dominant position. Strategic alignments with producers of prerecorded tapes 
reinforced the VHS advantage. T he perception among consumers that prerecorded tapes were 120 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 more available in VHS format further expanded VHSs share of the market. By the end of the 
1980s, Beta was no longer in production.  
1. The passage is primarily concerned with which of the following ? 
(A) Evaluating two competing technologies  
(B) Tracing the impact of a new technology by narrating a sequence of events  
(C) Reinterpreting an event from contemporary business history  
(D) Illustrating a business strategy by means of a case history  
(E) Proposing an innovative approach to business planning  
2. According to the passage, todays successful firms, unlike successful firms in the 
past, may earn the greatest profits by  
(A) investing in research to produce cheaper versions of existing tec hnology  
(B) being the first to market a competing technology  
(C) adapting rapidly to a technological standard previously set by a competing 
firm 
(D) establishing technological leadership in order to shape product definitions in 
advance of competing firms  
(E) emphasizing the development of methods for the mass production and 
distribution of a new technology  
3. According to the passage, consumers began to develop a preference for VCRs in 
the VHS format because they believed which of the following?  
(A) VCR s in the VHS format were technically better than competing -format 
VCRs.  
(B) VCRs in the VHS format were less expensive than competing -format VCRs.  
(C) VHS was the first standard format for VCRs.  
(D) VHS prerecorded videotapes were more available than Beta-format tapes.  
(E) VCRs in the Beta format would soon cease to be produced.  
4. The author implies that one way that VHS producers won control over the VCR 
market was by  
(A) carefully restricting access to VCR technology  
(B) giving up a slight early lead in VCR sales  in order to improve long -term 
prospects  
(C) retaining a strict monopoly on the production of prerecorded videotapes  
(D) sharing control of the marketing of VHS -format VCRs  
(E) sacrificing technological superiority over Beta -format VCRs in order to 
remain competitive in price  
5. The alignment of producers of VHS -format VCRs with producers of prerecorded 
videotapes is most similar to which of the following?  
(A) The alignment of an automobile manufacturer with another automobile  GMAT  121 
 manufacturer to adopt a standard design for automobile engines.  
(B) The alignment of an automobile manufacturer with an automotive glass 
company whereby  the manufacturer agrees to purchase automobile 
windshields only from that one glass company . 
(C) The alignment of an automobile manufacturer with a petroleum company to 
ensure the widespread availability of the fuel required by a new type of 
engine developed by the manufacturer.  
(D) The alignment of an automobile manufacturer with its dea lers to adopt a plan 
to improve automobile design.  
(E) The alignment of an automobile dealer with an automobile rental chain to 
adopt a strategy for an advertising campaign to promote a new type of 
automobile . 
6. Which of the following best describes the relation of the first paragraph to the 
passage a s a whole?  
(A) It makes a general observation to be exemplified.  
(B) It outlines a process to be analyzed.  
(C) It poses a question to be answered.  
(D) It advances an argument to be disputed.  
(E) It introduces conflicting arguments to be reconciled.