In most earthquakes the Earth s crust cracks like porcelain. Stress builds up  until a fracture 
forms at a depth of a fe w kilometers and the crust slips to relieve the stress. Some earthquakes, 
however, take place hundreds of kilometers down in the Earth s mantle, where high pressure 
makes rock so ductile that it flows instead of cracking, even under stress severe enough to  
deform it like putty. How can there be earthquakes at such depths?  
That such deep events do occur has been accepted only since 1927, when the seismologist 
Kiyoo  Wadati convincingly demonstrated their existence. Instead of comparing the arrival times 
of seismic waves at different locations, as earlier researchers had done. Wadati relied on a time 
difference between the arrival of primary (P) waves and the slower secondary (S) waves. 
Because P and S waves travel at different but fairly constant speeds, the i nterval between their 
arrivals increases in proportion to  the distance from the earthquake focus , or rupture point.  
For most earthquakes, Wadati discovered, the interval was quite short near the epicenter , 
the point on the surface where shaking is strongest. F or a few events, however, the delay was 
long even at the epicenter. Wadati saw a similar pattern when he analyzed data on the intensity  GMAT  199 
 of shaking. Most earthquakes had a small area of intense shaking, which weakened rapidly with 
increasing distance from t he epicenter, but others were characterized by a lower peak intensity, 
felt over a broader area. Both the P -S intervals and the intensity patterns suggested two kinds 
of earthquakes: the more common shallow events, in which the focus lay just under the 
epicenter, and deep events, with a focus several hundred kilometers down.  
The question remained: how can such quakes occur, given  that mantle rock at a depth of 
more than 50  kilometers is too ductile to store enough stress to fracture? Wadati s work 
suggested that deep events occur in areas (now called Wadati -Benioff zones) where one crustal 
plate is forced under anoth er and descends into the mantle. The descending rock is 
substantially cooler than the surrounding mantle and hence is less ductile and much more liable 
to fracture.  
1. The passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) demonstrating why the methods of early seism ologists were flawed  
(B) arguing that deep events are poorly understood and deserve further study  
(C) defending a revolutionary theory about the causes of earthquakes and 
methods of predicting them  
(D) discussing evidence for the existence of deep events a nd the conditions that 
allow them to occur  
(E) comparing the effects of shallow events with those of deep events  
2. The author uses the comparisons to porcelain and putty (lines 2 and 8) in order to  
(A) explain why the Earth s mantle is under great pressure  
(B) distinguish the earthquake s epic enter from its focus  
(C) demonstrate the conditions under which a Wadati -Benioff zone forms  
(D) explain why S waves are slower than P waves  
(E) illustrate why the crust will fracture but the mantle will not  
3. It can be inferred from the passage that if  the S waves from an earthquake arrive 
at a given location long after the P waves, which of the following must be true?  
(A) The earthquake was a deep event.  
(B) The earthquake was a shallow event.  
(C) The earthquake focus was distant.  
(D) The earthquake fo cus was nearby.  
(E) The earthquake had a low peak intensity.  
4. The method used by Wadati to determine the depths of earthquakes is most like 
which of the following?  
(A) Determining the depth of a well by dropping stones into the well and timing 
how long they take to reach the bottom  
(B) Determining the height of a mountain by measuring the shadow it casts at 
different times of the day  200 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) Determining the distance from a thunderstorm by timing the interval between 
the flash of a lightning bolt and the thunder it produc es 
(D) Determining the distance between two points by counting the number of 
paces it takes to cover the distance and measuring a single pace  
(E) Determining the speed at which a car is traveling by timing how long it takes 
to travel a known distance  
5. The passage supports which of the following statements about the relationship 
between the epicenter and the focus of an earthquake?  
(A) P wa ves originate at the focus and S waves originate at the epicenter.  
(B) In deep events the epicenter and the focus are reversed.  
(C) In shallow events the epicenter and the focus coincide.  
(D) In both deep and shallow events the focus lies beneath the epice nter. 
(E) The epicenter is in the crust, whereas the focus is in the mantle.  
6. The passage suggests that which of the following must take place in order for any 
earthquake to occur?  
I. Stress must build up.  
II. Cool rock must descend into the mantle.  
III. A fracture must occur.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) I and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
7. Information presented in the passage suggests that, compared with seismic 
activity at the epicenter of a shallow event, seismic activity at the epicenter of a 
deep event is characterized by  
(A) shorter P -S intervals and higher peak intensity  
(B) shorter P -S intervals and lower peak intensity  
(C) longer P -S intervals and similar peak intensity  
(D) longer P -S intervals and higher peak intensity  
(E) longer P-S intervals and lower peak intensity  
8. The passage suggests which of the following about the views held by researchers 
before 1927?  
(A) Some researchers did not believe that deep events could actually occur.  
(B) Many researchers rejected the use of P -S intervals for determining the depths 
of earthquakes.  
(C) Some researchers doubted that the mantle was too ductile to store the stress 
needed for an earthquake.   GMAT  201 
 (D) Most researchers expected P waves to be slower than S waves.  
(E) Few researchers accepted the current model of how shallow events occur.  
9. The author s explanation of how deep events occur would be most weakened if 
which of the following were discovered to be true?  
(A) Deep events are far less common than shall ow events.  
(B) Deep events occur in places other than where crustal plates meet.  
(C) Mantle rock is more ductile at a depth of several hundred kilometers than it is 
at 50 kilometers.  
(D) The speeds of both P and S waves are slightly greater than previously  
thought.  
(E) Below 650 kilometers earthquakes cease to occur.