Modern manufacturers, who need reliable sources o f materials and technologically 
advanced components to operate profitably, face an increasingly difficult choice between 
owning the producers of these items (a practice known as backward integration ) and buying 
from independent  producers. Manufacturers who integrate may reap short -term rewards, but 
they often restrict their future capacity for  innovative product development.  
Backward integration removes the need for some purchasing and marketing functions,  
centralizes overhead, and permits manufacturers to eliminate duplicated efforts in research and 
development.  Where components are commodities (ferrous metals or petroleum, for example), 
backward integration almost certainly boosts profits. Nevertheless, b ecause product innovation 
means adopting the most technologically advanced and cost -effective ways of making 
components, backward integration may entail a serious risk for a technologically active 
company for example, a producer of sophisticated consumer e lectronics.  
A company that decides to make rather than buy important parts can lock itself into an 
outdated technology. Independent suppliers may be unwilling to share innovations with 
assemblers with whom they are competing. Moreover, when an assembler se ts out to master 
the technology of producing advanced components, the resulting demands on its resources 
may compromise its ability to assemble these components successfully into end products. 
Long-term contracts with suppliers can achieve many of the same  cost benefits as backward 
integration without compromising a companys ability to innovate.  
However, moving away from backward integration is not a complete solution either. 
Developing innovative technologies requires independent suppliers of components t o invest 
huge sums in research and development. The resulting low profit margins on the sale of 
components threaten the long -term financial stability of these firms. Because the ability of 
end-product assemblers to respond to market opportunities depends h eavily on suppliers of 
components, assemblers are often forced to integrate by purchasing the suppliers of 
components just to keep their suppliers in business.  
257. According to the passage, all of the following are benefits associated with 
backward integr ation EXCEPT:  
(A) improvement in the management of overhead expenses  
(B) enhancement of profit margins on sales of components  
(C) simplification of purchasing and marketing operations  
(D) reliability of a source of necessary components  
(E) elimination of unnecessary research efforts  
258. According to passage, when an assembler buys a firm that makes some important 
component of the end product that the assembler produces, independent suppliers 
of the same component may  
(A) withhold te chnological innovations from the assembler   GMAT  281 
 (B) experience improved profit margins on sales of their products  
(C) lower their prices to protect themselves from competition  
(D) suffer financial difficulties and go out of business  
(E) stop developing new v ersions of the component  
259. Which of the following best describes the way the last paragraph functions in the 
context of the passage?  
(A) The last in a series of arguments supporting the central argument of the 
passage is presented.  
(B) A viewpoint is pr esented which qualifies one presented earlier in the passage.  
(C) Evidence is presented in support of the argument developed in the preceding 
paragraph.  
(D) Questions arising from the earlier discussion are identified as points of 
departure for further stu dy of the topic.  
(E) A specific example is presented to illustrate the main elements of argument 
presented in the earlier paragraphs.  
260. According to the passage, which of the following relationships between profits 
and investments in research and dev elopment holds true for producers of 
technologically advanced components?  
(A) Modest investments are required and the profit margins on component sales 
are low.  
(B) Modest investments are required but the profit margins on component sales 
are quite high.  
(C) Despite the huge investments that are required, the profit margins on 
components sales are high.  
(D) Because huge investments are required, the profit margins on component 
sales are low.  
(E) Long -term contractual relationships with purchasers of components ensure a 
high ratio of profits to investment costs.