Methods  for typing blood were developed around the turn of the century, about the same 
time that fingerprints were first used for identification. Only in the last de cade or two, however, 
have scientists begun to believe that genetic markers in blood and other bodily fluids may 
someday prove as useful in crime detection as fingerprints.  
The standard ABO blood typing has long been used as a form of negative identificati on. 
Added sophistication came with the discovery of additional  subgroups of genetic markers in 
blood and with the discovery that genetic markers are present not only in blood but also in 
other bodily fluids, such as perspiration and saliva.  
These discoveri es were of little use in crime detection, however, because of the 
circumstances in which police scientists must work. Rather than a plentiful sample of blood 
freshly drawn from a patient, the crime laboratory is likely to receive only a tiny fleck of dried  
blood of unknown age from an unknown donor  on a shirt or a scrap of rag that has spent 
hours or days exposed to air, high temperature, and other contaminants.   GMAT  255 
 British scientists found a method for identifying genetic markers more precisely in small 
samp les. In this process, called electrophoresis, a sample is placed on a tray containing a gel 
through which an electrical current is then passed. A trained analyst reads the resulting 
patterns in the gel to determine the presence of various chemical markers.  
Electrophoresis made it possible to identify several  thousand subgroups of blood types 
rather than the twelve known before. However, the equipment and special training required 
were expensive. In addition, the process could lead to the destruction of evid ence. For example, 
repeated tests of a blood -flecked shirt one for each marker led to increasing deterioration of 
the evidence and the cost of a week or more of laboratory time.  
It remained for another British researcher, Brian Wrexall, to demonstrate that  simultaneous 
analyses, using an inexpensive electrophoresis apparatus , could test for ten different genetic 
markers within a 24 -hour period. This development made the study of blood and other fluid 
samples an even more valuable tool for crime  detection.  
1. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with describi ng 
(A) how advances in crime detection methods have led to new discoveries in 
science  
(B) various ways in which crime detection laboratories assist the police  
(C) the development of new scientific tools for use in crime detection  
(D) areas of current resea rch in the science of crime detection  
(E) developments in genetic research and their application to crime detection  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that electrophoresis resembles fingerprinting 
in that both  
(A) provide a form of negative identification in crime detection  
(B) were fi rst developed by British scientists  
(C) may be used to help identify those who were present at the time of a crime  
(D) were developed by scientists at around the same time  
(E) must be employed almost immediately after a crime to be effective  
3. The auth or sets off the word donor  (line 18) with quotation marks in order to  
(A) emphasize that most of the blood samples received by crime laboratories 
come from anonymous sources  
(B) underscore the contrast between the work done in a crime laboratory and th at 
done in a blood bank  
(C) call attention to the fact that, because of underfunding, crime laboratories are 
forced to rely on charitable  contributions  
(D) show that the word is being used in a technical, rather than a general, sense  
(E) indicate that the blood samples received by crime laboratories are not given 
freely  
4. The passage contains information that would answer which of the following 
questions?  256 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) Is evidence of genetic markers in bodily fluids admissible in court?  
(B) Can electrophoresis be used to identify genetic markers in saliva?  
(C) How many subgroups of blood types are currently  identifiable?  
(D) How accurate is the process of electrophoresis?  
(E) How many tests for genetic markers must police scientists run i n order to 
establish the identity of a criminal?  
5. According to the passage, all of the following may reduce the usefulness of a 
fluid sample for crime detection EXCEPT  
(A) the passage of time  
(B) discoloration  or staining  
(C) exposure to heat  
(D) the sma ll size of the sample  
(E) exposure to contaminants  
6. The passage implies that electrophoresis may help scientists determine  
(A) whether or not a sample of blood could have come from  a particular person  
(B) the age and condition of a dried specimen of blood or other bodily fluid  
(C) when and where a crime was probably committed  
(D) the cause of death in homicide cases  
(E) the age, gender, and ethnic background of an unknown criminal suspect  
7. According to the passage, Brian Wrexall s refinement of electrophoresis led to  
(A) more accurate test results  
(B) easier availability of fluid samples  
(C) wider applicability of genetic analysis  
(D) increased costs of testing  
(E) more rapid testing  
8. Which of the following statements about genetic markers can be inferred from the  
passage?  
I. They carry an electrical charge.  
II. They cannot be identified through standard ABO blood  typing.  
III. They were of no use in crime detection before the invention of 
electrophoresis.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III   GMAT  257