Early models of the geography of the metropolis were unicellular: that is, they assumed 
that the entire urban district would normally be domin ated by a single central district, around 
which the various economic functions of the community would be focused. This central 
business district (CBD) is the source of so -called high -order goods and services, which can most 
efficiently be provided from a c entral location rather than from numerous widely dispersed 
locations. Thus, retailers of infrequently and irregularly purchased goods, such as fur coats, 
jewelry, and antique furniture, and specialized service outlets , such as th eaters, advertising 
agencies, law firms, and government agencies, will generally be found in the CBD. By contrast, 
less costly, more frequently demanded goods, such as groceries and housewares, and 
low-order services, such as shoe repair and hairdressing, will be available at many small, widely 
scattered outlets throughout the metropolis.  
Both the concentric -ring model of the metropolis , first developed in Chicago in the late 
nineteenth century, and the sector model, closely associated with the work of Home r Hoyt in 
the 1930s, make the CBD the focal point  of the metropolis. The concentric -ring model assumes 
that the varying degrees of need for  accessibility to the CBD of various kinds of economic 
entities will be the main determinant of their location. Thus, wholesale and manufacturing firms, 
which need easy accessibility to the specialized  legal, financial, and governmental services 
provided in the CBD, will normally be located just outside  the CBD itself. Residential area s will 
occupy the outer rings of the model, with low -income groups residing in the relatively crowded 
older housing close to the business zone and high -income groups occupying the outermost ring, 
in the more spacious, newer residential areas built up throu gh urban expansion.  
Homer Hoyt s sector model is a modified version of the concentric -ring model. Recognizing 
the influence of early established patterns of geographic distribution on the later growth of the 
city, Hoyt developed the concept of directional inertia.  According to Hoyt, custom and social 
pressures tend to perpetuate locational patterns within the city. Thus, if a particular part of the 
city (say, the east side) becomes a common residential area for higher -income families, perhaps 218 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 because of a p articular topographical advantage such as a lake or other desirable feature, 
future expansion of the high -income segment of the population is likely to proceed in the same 
direction. In our example, as the metropolis expands, a wedge -shaped sector would de velop on 
the east side of the city in which the higher -income residence would be clustered. 
Lower-income residences, along with manufacturing facilities, would be confined, therefore, to 
the western margins of the CBD.  
Although Hoyt s model undoubtedly rep resented an advance in sophistication over the 
simpler concentric -ring model, neither model fully accounts  for the increasing importance of 
focal points other than the traditional CBD. Recent years have witnessed he establishment 
around older cities of sec ondary nuclei centered on suburban business districts. In other cases, 
particular kinds of goods, services, and manufacturing facilities have clustered in specialized 
centers away from the CBD, encouraging the development of particular housing patterns in the 
adjacent areas. A new multicellular model of metropolitan geography is needed to express 
these and other emerging trends of urban growth.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) explain the significance of Hoyt s concept of directional inertia and its effect 
on patterns of urban growth  
(B) emphasize the inadequacy of past attempts to explain patterns of urban 
geography  
(C) analyze two varying theories concerning the distribution of residential areas 
within and around the metropolis  
(D) describe two models of metropolitan  geography and suggest their limitations  
(E) show the importance of the central business district as a focus for urban 
growth  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that according to a unicellular urban model, 
law firms are com monly located near the center of a city mainly because  
(A) law firms benefit from the proximity to financial and governmental services  
that a center city location provides  
(B) the demand for legal services is too irregular to support many small law firms 
in the outer districts of the city  
(C) law firms require accessibility  to the wholesale and retail businesses that 
provide a major  share of their clientele  
(D) the high -income groups that make up the primary users of legal services 
demand easy access to the  firms  offices  
(E) the specialized service personnel required by a law firm are often interested in 
residing as close as possible to the city center  
3. According to the concentric -ring model, in which of the following orders (from 
the center of the cit y outward) would the areas of the typical city be arranged ? 
(A) central business district, low -income housing, wholesale and manufacturing 
businesses, high -income housing   GMAT  219 
 (B) central  business district, wholesale and manufacturing businesses, 
low-income hou sing, high -income housing  
(C) wholesale and manufacturing businesses, central business district, 
low-income housing, high -income housing  
(D) central business district, high -income housing, wholesale and manufacturing 
businesses, low -income housing  
(E) wholesale and manufacturing businesses, low -income housing, central 
business district, high -income housing  
4. According to the passage, the sector model differs from the concentric -ring model 
primarily in that it  
(A) stresses the role of topographi c features in determining patterns of urban 
development  
(B) emphasizes the continuing expansion of the city as an influence on urban  
development  
(C) recognizes the importance of focal points of urban growth other than the 
traditional central business distr ict 
(D) assumes that the need  for access to the central business district is the main 
determinant of urban developmental patterns  
(E) takes into account the influence of certain social factors on urban 
geographical patterns  
5. The passage states that both the concentric -ring model and the sector model  
(A) inadequately represent the forms of urban development emerging in today s 
cities 
(B) need to be considerably refined to be of real use to students of urban growth  
(C) have been superseded by more recently developed models of urban growth  
(D) represent older cities more accurately than they do newly founded 
metropolitan areas  
(E) fail to explain the rapid outward growth of cities that has occurred in recent 
years  
6. According to the passage, an updated model of urban geography would indicate 
the 
(A) phenomenal growth in population and area of suburban residential districts 
beyon d the limits of the city itself  
(B) recent decline in the influence of business and industry over the geographical 
patterns of urban growth  
(C) growing importance of urban business and service centers located away from 
the central business district  
(D) clu stering of business facilities in recently  built areas, while older districts are 
turned  into residential areas  220 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) gradual displacement of older urban centers by new, more highly specialized 
cities in geographically dispersed locations  
7. All of the fo llowing are examples of the emerging trends of urban growth 
described in the last paragraph of the passage EXCEPT  
(A) the construction in a suburban community of a large shopping mall where 
many of the local residents do most of their buying  
(B) the openin g of an industrial park  on the outskirts of a declining older city  
(C) the construction of hospital -medical school complex near a highway  fifteen 
miles from a downtown business district  
(D) the building of a residential  development near a suburban tool factory to 
house t he factory workers  and their families  
(E) the creation of a luxury housing development in a rural setting thirty miles 
from the center of a city  
8. Which of the following best describes the organization of the last paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) It summa rizes the information presented in the first three paragraphs and 
draws some conclusions.  
(B) It outlines a new model, applies it to recent phenomena, and argues in favor 
of its adoption.  
(C) It introduces no evidence  in support of an existing model.  
(D) I t evaluates two models in the light of recent evidence  and advocates the 
development of a third model.  
(E) It compares one model unfavorably with another and develops the 
comparison by citing examples.