In the two decades between 1910 and 1930, over ten percent o f the Black p opulation of 
the United States left the South, where the preponderance of the Black population had been 
located, and migrated to northern states, with the largest number moving, it is claimed, 
between 1916 and 1918.  It has been frequently assumed, but not proved, that the majority of 
the migrants in what has come to be called the Great Migration came from rural areas and were 
motivated by two concurrent factors: the collapse of the cotton industry following the boll 
weevil  infestation, which began in 1898, and increased demand in the North for labor following 
the cessation of European immigration caused by the outbreak of the First World War in 1914.  
This assumption has led to the conclusion that the migrants subsequ ent lack of economic 
mobility in the North is tied to rural background, a background that implies unfamiliarity with 
urban living and a lack of industrial skills.  
But the question of who actually left the South has never been rigorously investigated. 
Although numerous investigations document an exodus from rural southern areas to southern 
cities prior to the Great Migration , no one has considered whether the same migrants then 
moved on to northern cities. In 1910 over 600,0 00 Black workers, or ten percent o f the Black 
work force, reported themselves to be engaged in manufacturing and mechanical pursuits, 
the federal census category roughly encompassing the entire industrial sector. The Great 
Migration could easily have been made up entirely of this group a nd their families. It is perhaps 
surprising to argue that an employed population could be enticed to move, but an explanation 
lies in the labor conditions then prevalent in the South.  
About thirty -five percent of the urban Black population in the South was  engaged in skilled 
trades. Some were from the old artisan class of slavery blacksmiths , masons, 
carpenters which  had had a monopoly of certain trades, but they were gradually being pushed 
out by competition, mechanization, and obsolescence . The remaining sixty-five percent, more 
recently urbanized, worked in newly developed industries tobacco , lumber, coal and iron 
manufacture, and railroads. Wages in the South, however, were low, and Black workers were 
aware, through labor recruiters and the Black press, that they could earn more even as 
unskilled workers in the North than they could as artisans in the South. After the boll weevil 
infestation, urban Black workers faced competition from the continuing influx of both Black and 
White rural workers, who were d riven to undercut the wages formerly paid for industrial jobs. 
Thus, a move north would be seen as advantageous to a group that was already urbanized and 
steadily employed, and the easy conclusion tying their subsequent economic problems in the 
North to th eir rural background comes into question.  
1. The author indicates explicitly that which of the following records has been a 
source of information in her investigation?  
(A) United States Immigration Service reports from 1914 to 19 30 
(B) Payrolls of southern  manufacturing firms between 1910 and 1930  
(C) The volume of cotton exports between 1898 and 19 10 
(D) The federal census of 1910  
(E) Advertisements of labor recruiters appearing in southern newspapers after  GMAT  41 
 1910 
2. In the passage, the author anticipates which of the following as a possible 
objection to her argument?  
(A) It is uncertain how many people actually migrated during th e Great 
Migration.  
(B) The eventual economic status of the Great Migration migrants has not been 
adequately traced.  
(C) It is not likely that people with steady jobs would have reason to move to 
another area of the country.  
(D) It is not true that the term  manufacturing and mechanical pursuits actually 
encompasses the entire industrial sector.  
(E) Of the Black workers living in southern cities, only those in a small number 
of trades were threatened by obsolescence.  
3. According to the passage, which of the following is true of wages in southern 
cities in 1910?  
(A) They were being pushed lowe r as a result of increased competition.  
(B) They had begun t to rise so that southern industry could attract rural workers.  
(C) They had increased for skilled workers but decreased for unskilled workers.  
(D) They had increased in large southern cities but decreased in small southern 
cities.  
(E) They had increased in newly developed industries but decreased in the older 
trades.  
4. The author cites each of the following as possible influences in a Black workers 
decision to migrate north in the Great Migration EXCEPT  
(A) wage levels in nort hern cities  
(B) labor recruiters  
(C) competition from rural workers  
(D) voting rights in northern states  
(E) the Black press  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that the easy conclusion mentioned in line 
53 is based on which of the following assump tions?  
(A) People who migrate from rural areas to large cities usually do so for 
economic reasons.  
(B) Most people who leave rural areas to take jobs in cities return to rural areas as 
soon as it is financially possible for them to do so.  
(C) People with r ural backgrounds are less likely to succeed economically in 
cities than are those with urban backgrounds.  
(D) Most people who were once skilled workers are not willing to work as 
unskilled workers.  42 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) People who migrate from their birthplaces to other regions of country seldom 
undertake a second migration.  
6. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) support an alternative to an accepted methodology  
(B) present evidence that resolves a contra diction  
(C) introduce a recently discovered source of information  
(D) challenge a widely accepted explanation  
(E) argue that a discarded theory deserves new attention  
7. According to information in the passage, which of the following is a correct 
sequen ce of groups of workers, from highest paid to lowest paid, in the period 
between 1910 and 1930?  
(A) Artisans in the North; artisans in the South; unskilled workers in the North; 
unskilled workers in the South  
(B) Artisans in the North and South; unskilled workers in the North; unskilled 
workers in the South  
(C) Artisans in the North; unskilled workers in the North; artisans in the South  
(D) Artisans in the North and South; unskilled urban workers in the North; 
unskilled rural workers in the South  
(E) Artisans in the North and South, unskilled rural workers in the North and 
South; unskilled urban workers in the North and South  
8. The material in the passage would be most relevant to a long discussion of which 
of the following topics?  
(A) The rea sons for the subsequent economic difficulties of those who 
participated in the Great Migration  
(B) The effect of migration on the regional economies of the United States 
following the First World War  
(C) The transition from a rural to an urban existence fo r those who migrated in 
the Great Migration  
(D) The transformation of the agricultural South following the boll weevil 
infestation  
(E) The disappearance of the artisan class in the United States as a consequence 
of mechanization in the early twentieth century