Seeking a competitive advantage, some professional service firms  (for example, firms 
providing advertising, accounting, or health care services) have considered offering 
unconditional guarantees of satisfaction. Such guarantees specify what clients can expect and 
what the firm will do if it fails to fulfill these expectations. Particularly with first -time clients, an 
unconditional guarantee can be an effective marketing tool if the clie nt is very cautious, the 
firms fees are high, the negative consequences of bad service are grave, or business is difficult 
to obtain through referrals and word-of-mouth . 
However, an unconditional guarantee can sometimes hinder marketing efforts. With its 
implication that failure is possible, the guarantee may, paradoxically, cause clients to doubt the 
service firms ability to deliv er the promised level of service. It may conflict with a firms desire 
to appear sophisticated, or may even suggest that a firm is begging for business. In legal and 
health care services, it may mislead clients by suggesting that lawsuits or medical proced ures 
will have guaranteed outcomes. Indeed, professional service firms with outstandin g reputations 134 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 and performance to match have little to gain from offering unconditional guarantees. And any 
firm that implements an unconditional guarantee without underta king a commensurate 
commitment to quality of service is merely employing a potentially costly marketing gimmick.  
1. The primary function of the passage as a whole is to  
(A) account for the popularity of a practice  
(B) evaluate the utility of a practice  
(C) demonstrate how to institute a practice  
(D) weigh the ethics of using a strategy  
(E) explain the reasons for pursuing a strategy  
2. All of the following are mentioned in the passage as circumstances in which 
professional service firms can benefit from offering an unconditional guarantee 
EXCEPT:  
(A) The firm is having difficulty ret aining its clients of long standing.  
(B) The firm is having difficulty getting business through client 
recommendations.  
(C) The firm charges substantial fees for its services.  
(D) The adverse effects of poor performance by the firm are significant for the 
client.  
(E) The client is reluctant to incur risk.  
3. Which of the following is cited in the passage as a goal of some professional 
service firms in offering unconditional guarantees of satisfaction?  
(A) A limit on the firms liability  
(B) Successful competiti on against other firms  
(C) Ability to justify fee increases  
(D) Attainment of an outstanding reputation in a field  
(E) Improvement in the quality of the firms service  
4. The passages description of the issue raised by unconditional guarantees for 
health care or legal services most clearly implies that which of the following is 
true?  
(A) The legal and medical professions have standards of practice that would be 
violated by attempts to fulfill such unconditional guarantees.  
(B) The result of a lawsuit of  medical procedure cannot necessarily be determined 
in advance by the professionals handling a clients case.  
(C) The dignity of the legal and medical professions is undermined by any 
attempts at marketing of professional services, including unconditional 
guarantees.  
(D) Clients whose lawsuits or medical procedures have unsatisfactory outcomes 
cannot be adequately compensated by financial settlements alone.   GMAT  135 
 (E) Predicting the monetary cost of legal or health care services is more difficult 
than predictin g the monetary cost of other types of professional services.  
5. Which of the following hypothetical situations best exemplifies the potential 
problem noted in the second sentence of the second paragraph (lines 14 -17)? 
(A) A physicians unconditional guaran tee of satisfaction encourages patients to 
sue for malpractice if they are unhappy with the treatment they receive.  
(B) A lawyers unconditional guarantee of satisfaction makes clients suspect that 
the lawyer needs to find new clients quickly to increase t he firms income.  
(C) A business consultants unconditional guarantee of satisfaction is undermined 
when the consultant fails to provide all of the services that are promised.  
(D) An architects unconditional guarantee of satisfaction makes clients wonder 
how often the architects buildings fail to please clients.  
(E) An accountants unconditional guarantee of satisfaction leads clients to 
believe that tax returns prepared by the accountant are certain to be accurate.  
6. The passage most clearly implies which of the following about the professional 
service firms  mentioned in line 22?  
(A) They are unlikely to have offered unconditional guarantees of satisfaction in 
the past.  
(B) They are usually profitable enough to be able to compensate clients according 
to the terms of an unconditional guarantee.  
(C) They usuall y practice in fields in which the outcomes are predictable.  
(D) Their fees are usually more affordable than those charged by other 
professional service firms.  
(E) Their clients are usually already satisfied with the quality of service that is 
delivered.