Most economists in the United Stat es seem captivated by the spell of the free market. 
Consequently, nothing seems good or normal that does not accord with the requirements of the 
free market. A price that is determined by the seller or, for that matter , established by anyone 
other than the aggregate of consumers seems pernicious. Accordingly, it requires a major act of 
will to think of price -fixing  (the determination of prices by the seller) as both normal and 
having a valuable economic funct ion. In fact, price -fixing is normal in all industrialized societies 
because the industrial system itself provides, as an effortless consequence of its own 
development, the price -fixing that it requires. Modern industrial planning requires and rewards 
great size. Hence, a comparatively small number of large firms will be competing for the same 
group of consumers. That each large firm will act with consideration of its own needs and thus 
avoid selling its products for more than its competitors charge is comm only recognized by 
advocates of free -market economic theories. But each large firm will also act with full 
consideration of the needs that it has in common with the other large firms competing for the 
same customers. Each large firm will thus avoid signifi cant price -cutting, because price -cutting 
would be prejudicial to the common interest in a stable demand for products. Most economists 
do not see price -fixing when it occurs because they expect it to be brought about by a number 
of explicit agreements amon g large firms; it is not.  
Moreover, those economists who argue that allowing the free market to operate without 
interference is the most efficient method of establishing prices have not considered the 
economies of non -socialist countries other than the Uni ted states. These economies employ 
intentional price -fixing, usually in an overt fashion. Formal price -fixing by cartel and informal 
price-fixing by agreements covering the members of an industry are commonplace. Were there 
something peculiarly efficient a bout the free market and inefficient about price -fixing, the 
countries that have avoided the first and used the second would have suffered drastically in 
their economic development. There is no indication that they have.  
Socialist industry also works withi n a framework of controlled prices. In the early 1970s, 
the Soviet Union began to give firms and industries some of the flexibility in adjusting prices 
that a more informal evolution has accorded the capitalist system. Economists in the United 
States have  hailed the change as a return to the free market. But Soviet firms are no more 
subject to prices established by a free market over which they exercise little influence than are 
capitalist firms; rather, Soviet firms have been given the power to fix prices .  GMAT  23 
 1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) refute the theory that the free market plays a useful role in the development of 
industrialized societies  
(B) suggest methods by which economists and members of the government of the 
United States can recog nize and combat price -fixing by large firms  
(C) show that in industrialized societies price -fixing and the operation of the free 
market are not only compatible but also mutually beneficial  
(D) explain the various ways in which industrialized societies can fix prices in 
order to stabilize the free market  
(E) argue that price -fixing, in one form or another, is an inevitable part of and 
benefit to the economy of any industrialized society  
2. The passage provides information that would answer which of the following 
questions about price -fixing?  
I. What ar e some of the ways in which prices can be fixed?  
II. For what products is price -fixing likely to be more profitable that the 
operation of the free market?  
III. Is price -fixing more common in socialist industrialized societies or in 
non-socialist industrial ized societies?  
(A) I only  
(B) III only 
(C) I and  II only  
(D) II and  III only 
(E) I, II, and III 
3. The authors attitude toward Most economists in the United States( line 1 ) can 
best be described as  
(A) spiteful and envious  
(B) scornful and denunciatory  
(C) critical and condescending  
(D) ambivalent bu t deferential  
(E) uncertain but interested  
4. It can be inferred from the authors argument that a price fixed by the seller 
seems pernicious  (line 7 ) because  
(A) people do not have confidence in large firms  
(B) people do not  expect the government to regulate prices  
(C) most economists believe that consumers as a group should determine prices  
(D) most economists associate fixed prices with communist and socialist 
economies  
(E) most economists believe that no one group shoul d determine prices  24 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 5. The suggestion in the passage that price -fixing in industrialized societies is 
normal arises from the authors statement that price -fixing is  
(A) a profitable result of economic development  
(B) an inevitable result of the industrial s ystem  
(C) the result of a number of carefully organized decisions  
(D) a phenomenon common to industrialized and non -industrialized societies  
(E) a phenomenon best achieved cooperatively by government and industry  
6. According to the author, price -fixing in non -socialist countries is often  
(A) accidental but productive  
(B) illegal but useful  
(C) legal and innovative  
(D) traditional and rigid  
(E) intentional and widespread  
7. According to the author, what is the result of the Soviet Unions change in 
economic policy in the 1970s?  
(A) Soviet firms show greater profit.  
(B) Soviet firms have less control over the free market.  
(C) Soviet firms  are able to adjust to technological advances.  
(D) Soviet firms have some authority to fix prices.  
(E) Soviet firms are more responsive to the free market.  
8. With which of the following statements regarding the behavior of large firms in 
industrialized  societies would the author be most likely to agree?  
(A) The directors of large firms will continue to anticipate the demand for 
products . 
(B) The directors of large firms are less interested in achieving a predictable level 
of profit than in achieving a l arge profit.  
(C) The directors of large firms will strive to reduce the costs of their products . 
(D) Many directors of large firms believe that the government should establish 
the prices that will be charged for products . 
(E) Many directors of large firms believe that the price charged for products is 
likely to increase annually.  
9. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) predicting the consequences of a practice  
(B) criticizing a point of view  
(C) ca lling attention to recent discoveries  
(D) proposing a topic for research  
(E) summarizing conflicting opinions   GMAT  25