Increasingly, his torians are blaming diseases imported from the Old World for the 
staggering disparity between the indigenous population of America in 1492 new estimates of 
which soar as high as 100 million, or approximately one -sixth of the human race at that 
timeand the  few million full-blooded  Native Americans alive at the end of the nineteenth 
century. There is no doubt that chronic disease was an important factor in the precipitous 
decline, and it is highly probable that the greatest killer was epidemic disease , especially as 
manifested in virgin -soil epidemics.  
Virgin -soil epidemics are those in which the populations at risk have had no previous 
contact with the diseases that strike them and are therefore immunologically almost 
defenseless. That virgi n-soil epidemics were important in American history is strongly indicated 
by evidence that a number of dangerous maladies smallpox, measles, malaria, yellow fever, 
and undoubtedly several more were unknown in the pre -Columbian New World. The effects of 
their sudden introduction are demonstrated in the early chronicles of America, which contain 
reports of horrendous epidemics and steep population declines, confirmed in many cases by 
recent quantitative analyses of Spanish tribute records and other sources. T he evidence 
provided by the documents of British and French colonies is not as definitive because the 
conquerors of those areas did not establish permanent settlements and begin to keep 
continuous records until the seventeenth century, by which time the wo rst epidemics had 
probably already taken place. Furthermore, the British tended to drive the native populations 
away, rather than enslaving them as the Spaniards did, so that the epidemics of British America 
occurred beyond the range of colonists direct o bservation.  
Even so, the surviving records of North America do contain references to deadly epidemics 
among the indigenous population. In 1616 -1619 an epidemic, possibly of bubonic or 
pneumonic plague, swept coastal New England, killing as many as nine out  of ten. During the 
1630s smallpox, the disease most fatal to the Native American people, eliminated half the 
population of the Huron and Iroquois confederations. In the 1820s fever devastated the people 
of the Columbia River area, killing eight out of t en of them.   GMAT  87 
 Unfortunately, the documentation of these and other epidemics is slight and frequently 
unreliable, and it is necessary to supplement what little we do know with evidence from recent 
epidemics among Native Americans. For example, in 1952 an outb reak of measles among the 
Native American inhabitants of Ungava Bay , Quebec, affected 99 percent of the population and 
killed 7 percent, even though some had the benefit of modern medicine. Cases such as this 
demonstrate that even diseases that are not nor mally fatal can have devastating consequences 
when they strike an immunologically defenseless community.  
1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) refute a common misconception  
(B) provide support for a hypothesis  
(C) analyze an argument  
(D) suggest a solution to a dilemma  
(E) reconcile opposing viewpoints  
2. According to the passage, virgin -soil epidemics can be distinguished from other 
catastrophic outbreaks of disease in that virgin -soil epidemics  
(A) recur more frequently than other chronic diseases  
(B) affect a mini mum of one -half of a given population  
(C) involve populations with no prior exposure to a disease  
(D) usually involve a number of interacting diseases  
(E) are less responsive to medical treatment than are other diseases  
3. According to the passage, the British colonists were unlike the Spanish colonists 
in that the British colonists  
(A) collected tribute from the native population  
(B) kept records from a very early date  
(C) drove Native Americans off the land  
(D) were unable to provide medical care again st epidemic disease  
(E) enslaved the native populations in America  
4. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage concerning Spanish 
tribute records?  
(A) They mention only epidemics of smallpox.  
(B) They were instituted in 1492.  
(C) They were being kept prior to the seventeenth century.  
(D) They provide quantitative and qualitative evidence about Native American 
populations.  
(E) They prove that certain diseases were unknown in the pre -Columbian New 
World.  
5. The author implies which of the following about me asles?  
(A) It is not usually a fatal disease.  88 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) It ceased to be a problem by the seventeenth century.  
(C) It is the disease most commonly involved in virgin -soil epidemics.  
(D) It was not a significant problem in Spanish colonies.  
(E) It affects only those who are immunologically defenseless against it.  
6. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about the Native 
American inhabitants of Ungava Bay?  
(A) They were almost all killed by the 1952 epidemic.  
(B) They were immunologically defens eless against measles.  
(C) They were the last native people to be struck by a virgin -soil epidemic.  
(D) They did not come into frequent contact with white Americans until the 
twentieth century.  
(E) They had been inoculated against measles.  
7. The author mentions the 1952 measles outbreak most probably in order to  
(A) demonstrate the impact of modern medicine on epidemic disease  
(B) corroborate the documentary evidence of epidemic disease in c olonial 
America  
(C) refute allegations of unreliability made against the historical record of 
colonial America  
(D) advocate new research into the continuing problem of epidemic disease  
(E) challenge assumptions about how the statistical evidence of epid emics should 
be interpreted  
8. Which of the following, if newly discovered, would most seriously weaken the 
authors argument concerning the importance of virgin -soil epidemics in the 
depopulation of Native Americans?  
(A) Evidence setting the pre -Columbian  population of the New World at only 80 
million  
(B) Spanish tribute records showing periodic population fluctuations  
(C) Documents detailing sophisticated Native American medical procedures  
(D) Fossils indicating Native American contact with smallpox prior  to 1492  
(E) Remains of French settlements dating back to the sixteenth century