Historians sometimes forget that history is con tinually being made and experienced before 
it is studied, interpreted, and read. These latter activities have their own history, of course, 
which may imp inge in unexpected ways on public events. It is difficult to predict when new 
pasts will overturn established historical interpretations and change the course of history.  
In the fall of 1954, for example, C. Vann Woodward delivered a lecture series at th e 
University of Virginia which challenged the prevailing dogma concerning the history, continuity, 110 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 and uniformity of racial segregation in the South. He argued that the Jim Crow  laws of the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries  not only codified traditional practice but also were a 
determined effort to erase the considerable progress made by Black people during and after 
Reconstruction in the 1870s. This revisionist view of Jim Crow legislation grew in part from the 
research th at Woodward had done for the NAACP legal campaign during its preparation for 
Brown v. Board of Education . The Supreme Court had issued its ruling in this epochal 
desegregation case a few months before Woodwards lectures.  
The lectures were soon published a s a book , The Strange Career of Jim Crow . Ten years 
later, in a preface to the second revised edition , Woodward confessed with ironic modesty that 
the first edition had begun to suffer under some of the handicaps that might be expected in a 
history of the  American Revolution published in 1776. That was a bit like hearing Thomas Paine 
apologize for the timing of his pamphlet Common Sense , which had a comparable impact. 
Although Common Sense also had a mass readership , Paine had intended to reach and inspir e: 
he was not a historian, and thus not concerned with accuracy or the dangers of historical 
anachronism. Yet, like Paine, Woodward had an unerring sense of the revolutionary moment, 
and of how historical evidence could undermine the mythological tradition  that was crushing 
the dreams of new social possibilities. Martin Luther King, Jr., testified to the profound effect of 
The Strange  Career of Jim Crow on the civil rights movement by praising the book and quoting 
it frequently.  
1. The new pasts mentioned  in line 6 can best be described as the  
(A) occurrence of events extremely similar to past events  
(B) history of the activities of studying, interpreting, and reading new historical 
writing  
(C) change in peoples understanding of the past due to more recen t historical 
writing  
(D) overturning of established historical interpretations by politically motivated 
politicians  
(E) difficulty of predicting when a given historical interpretation will be 
overturned  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that the prevailing dogma (line 10) held that  
(A) Jim Crow laws were passed to give legal status to well -established 
discrim inatory practices in the South  
(B) Jim Crow laws were passed to establish order and uniformity in the 
discriminatory practices of different southern states  
(C) Jim Crow laws were passed to erase the social gains that Black people had 
achieved since Reconst ruction  
(D) the continuity of racial segregation in the South was disrupted by passage of 
Jim Crow laws  
(E) the Jim Crow laws of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were 
passed to reverse the effect of earlier Jim Crow laws  
3. Which of the following is the best example of writing that is likely to be subject  GMAT  111 
 to the kinds of handicaps refe rred to in line 27?  
(A) A history of an auto manufacturing plant written by an employee during an 
auto-buying boom  
(B) A critique of a statewide school -desegregation plan written by an elementary 
school teacher in that state  
(C) A newspaper article assessi ng the historical importance of a United States 
President written shortly after the President has taken office  
(D) A scientific paper describing the benefits of a certain surgical technique 
written by the surgeon who developed the technique  
(E) Diary entries narrating the events of a battle written by a soldier who 
participated in the battle  
4. The passage suggests that C. Vann Woodward and Thomas Paine were similar in 
all of the following ways EXCEPT:  
(A) Both had works published in the midst of important historical events.  
(B) Both wrote works that enjoyed widespread popularity.  
(C) Both exhibited an understanding of the relevance of historical evidence to 
contemporary issues.  
(D) The works of both had a significant effect on events foll owing their 
publication.  
(E) Both were able to set aside worries about historical anachronism in order to 
reach and inspire.  
5. The attitude of the author of the passage toward the work of C. Vann Woodward 
is best described as one of  
(A) respectful regard  
(B) qualified approba tion 
(C) implied skepticism  
(D) pointed criticism  
(E) fervent advocacy  
6. Which of the following best describes the new idea expressed by C. Vann 
Woodward in his University of Virginia lectures in 1954?  
(A) Southern racial segregation was continuous and uniform.  
(B) Black people made considerable progress only after Reconstruction.  
(C) Jim Crow legislation was conventional in nature.  
(D) Jim Crow laws did not go as far in codifying traditional practice as they 
might have.  
(E) Jim Crow laws did much more than merely reinforce a tradition of 
segregation.