About twice every century, one of the massive stars in our galaxy blows itself apart in a 
supernova explo sion that sends massive quantities of radiation and matter into space and 
generates shock waves that sweep through the arms of the galaxy. The shock waves heat the 
interstellar gas, evaporate small clou ds, and compress larger ones to the point at which they 
collapse under their own gravity to form new stars. The general picture that has been 
developed for the supernova explosion and its aftermath goes something like this. Throughout 
its evolution, a star  is much like a leaky balloon. It keeps its equilibrium figure through a 
balance of internal pressure against the tendency to collapse under its own weight. The 
pressure is generated by nuclear reactions in the core of the star which must continually suppl y 
energy to balance the energy that leaks out  in the form of radiation. Eventually the nuclear fuel 
is exhausted, and the pressure drops in the core. With nothing to hold it up, the matter in the 166 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 center of the star collapses inward, creating higher and higher densities and temperatures, until 
the nuclei and electrons are fused into a super -dense lump of matter known as a neutron star.  
As the overlying layers rain down  on the surface of the neutron star, the temperature rises, 
until with a  blinding flash of radiation, the collaps e is reversed. A thermonuclear  shock wave 
runs through the now expanding stellar envelope, fusing lighter elements into heavier ones and 
producing a brilliant visual outburst that can be as intense as the light of 10 billion s uns. The 
shell of matter thrown off by the explosion plows through the surrounding gas, producing an 
expanding bubble of hot gas, with gas temperatures in the millions of degrees. This gas will 
emit most of its energy at X -ray wavelengths, so it is not sur prising that X -ray observatories 
have provided some of the most useful insights into the nature of the supernova phenomenon. 
More than twenty supernova remnants have now been detected in X -ray studies.  
Recent discoveries of meteorites with anomalous concen trations of certain isotopes 
indicate that a supernova might have precipitated the birth of our solar system more than four 
and a half billion years ago. Although the cloud that collapsed to form the Sun and the planets 
was composed primarily of hydrogen a nd helium, it also contained carbon, nitrogen, and 
oxygen, elements essential for life as we know it. Elements heavier than helium are 
manufactured deep in the interior of stars and would, for the most part , remain there if it were 
not for the cataclysmic supernova explosions that blow giant stars apart. Additionally, 
supernovas produce clouds of high -energy particles called cosmic rays . These high -energy 
particles continual ly bombard the Earth and are responsible for many of the genetic mutations 
that are the driving force of the evolution of species.  
1. Which of the following titles best describes the content of the passage?  
(A) The Origins and Effects of Supernovas  
(B) The  Life and Death of Stars  
(C) The Origins and Evolution of Life on Earth  
(D) The Aftermath of a Supernova  
(E) Violent Change in the Universe  
2. According to the passage, we can expect a supernova to occur in our galaxy  
(A) about twice each year  
(B) hundreds of times each century  
(C) about once every fifty years  
(D) about once every other century  
(E) abo ut once every four to five billion years  
3. According to the passage all of the following are true of supernovas EXCEPT 
that they  
(A) are extremely bright  
(B) are an explosion of some sort  
(C) emit large quantities of X -rays 
(D) result in the destruction o f a neutron star   GMAT  167 
 (E) are caused by the collision of large galaxies  
4. The author employs which of the following to develop the first paragraph?  
(A) Analogy  
(B) Deduction  
(C) Generalization  
(D) Example  
(E) Refutation  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that the me teorites mentioned by the author at 
line 39  
(A) contain dangerous concentrations of radioactive materials  
(B) give off large quantities of X -rays 
(C) include material not created in the normal development of our solar system  
(D) are larger than the meteors  normally found in a solar system like ours  
(E) contain pieces of a supernova that occurred several billion years ago  
6. The author implies that  
(A) it is sometimes easier to detect supernovas by observation of the X -ray 
spectrum than by observation of visible wavelengths of light  
(B) life on Ea rth is endangered by its constant exposure to radiation forces that 
are released by a supernova  
(C) recently discovered meteorites indicate that the Earth and other planets of our 
solar system survived the explosion of a supernova several billion years ago  
(D) lighter elements are formed from heavier elements during a supernova as the 
heavier elements are torn apart  
(E) the core of a neutron star is composed largely of heavier elements such as 
carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen  
7. According to the passage what is the first event in the sequence that  leads to the 
occurrence of a supernova?  
(A) An ordinary star begins to emit tremendous quantities of X -rays.  
(B) A neutron star is enveloped by a superheated cloud of gas.  
(C) An imbalance between light and heavy elements causes an ordinary star to 
collapse.  
(D) A cloud of interstellar gas rich in carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen , collapses to 
form a neutron star.  
(E) An ordinary star exhausts its supply of nuclear fuel and begins to collapse.  
8. According to the passage a neutron star is  
(A) a gaseous cloud containing heavy elements  
(B) an intermediate stage between an ordinary star and a supernova  168 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) the resi due that is left by a supernova  
(D) the core of an ordinary star that houses the thermonuclear reactions  
(E) one of billions of meteors that are scattered across the galaxy by a supernova  
9. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) speculating about t he origins of our solar system  
(B) presenting evidence proving the existence of supernovas  
(C) discussing the nuclear reaction that occurs in the core of a star  
(D) describing the sequence of scientific events  
(E) disproving a theory about the causes of  supernovas