Until recently, scientists did not know of a close vertebrate analogue to the extreme form of 
altruism observed in eusocial insects like ants and bees, whereby individuals cooperate, 
sometimes even sacrifici ng their own opportunities to survive and reproduce, for the good of 
others. However, such a vertebrate society may exist among underground colonies of the highly 
social rodent Heterocephalus  glaber,  the naked mole rat.  
A naked mole rat colony, like a beeh ive, wasps nest, or termite mound, is ruled by its 
queen, or reproducing female. Other adult female mole rats neither ovulate nor breed. The 
queen is the largest member of the colony, and she maintains her breeding status through a 
mixture of behavioral a nd, presumably, chemical control. Queens have been long -lived in 150 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 captivity, and when they die or are removed from a colony one sees violent fighting for breeding 
status among the larger remaining females, leading to a takeover by a new queen.  
Eusocial inse ct societies have rigid caste systems, each insects role being defined by its 
behavior, body shape, and physiology. In naked mole rat societies, on the other hand, 
differences in behavior are related primarily to reproductive status (reproduction being li mited 
to the queen and a few males), body size, and perhaps age. Smaller non -breeding members, 
both male and female, seem to participate primarily in gathering food, transporting nest 
material, and tunneling. Larger non breeders are active in defending the colony and perhaps in 
removing dirt from the tunnels. Jarvis work has suggested that differences in growth rates may 
influence the length of time that an individual performs a task, regardless of its age.  
Cooperative breeding has evolved many times in ver tebrates, but unlike naked mole rats, 
most cooperatively breeding vertebrates (except the wild dog, Lycaon pictus ) are dominated by 
a pair of breeders rather than by a single breeding female. The division of labor within social 
groups is less pronounced am ong other vertebrates than among naked mole rats, colony size is 
much smaller, and mating by subordinate females may not be totally suppressed, whereas in 
naked mole rat colonies subordinate females are not sexually active, and many never breed.  
1. Which o f the following most accurately states the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Naked mole rat colonies are the only known examples of cooperatively 
breeding vertebrate societies.  
(B) Naked mole rat colonies exhibit social organization based on a rigid caste 
system. 
(C) Behavior in naked mole rat colonies may well be a close vertebrate analogue 
to behavior in eusocial insect societies.  
(D) The mating habits of naked mole rats differ from those of any other vertebrate 
species.  
(E) The basis for the division of l abor among naked mole rats is the same as that 
among eusocial insects.  
2. The passage suggests that Jarvis work has called into question which of the 
following explanatory variables for naked mole rat behavior?  
(A) Size  
(B) Age  
(C) Reproductive status  
(D) Rate of growth  
(E) Previously exhibited behavior  
3. It can be inferred from the passage that the performance of tasks in naked mole 
rat colonies differs from task performance in eusocial insect societies in which of 
the following ways?  
(A) In naked mole rat colonies,  all tasks ate performed cooperatively.  
(B) In naked mole rat colonies, the performance of tasks is less rigidly determined 
by body shape.   GMAT  151 
 (C) In naked mole rat colonies, breeding is limited to the largest animals.  
(D) In eusocial insect societies, reprodu ction is limited to a single female.  
(E) In eusocial insect societies, the distribution of tasks is based on body size.  
4. According to the passage, which of the following is a supposition rather than a 
fact concerning the queen in a naked mole rat colony?  
(A) She is the largest member of  the colony.  
(B) She exerts chemical control over the colony.  
(C) She mates with more than one male.  
(D) She attains her status through aggression.  
(E) She is the only breeding female.  
5. The passage supports which of the following inferences about bree ding among 
Lycaon pictus?  
(A) The largest female in the social group does not maintain reproductive status 
by means of behavioral control.  
(B) An individuals ability to breed is related primarily to its rate of growth.  
(C) Breeding is the only task perfor med by the breeding female.  
(D) Breeding in the social group is not cooperative.  
(E) Breeding is not dominated by a single pair of dogs.  
6. According to the passage, naked mole rat colonies may differ from all other 
known vertebrate  groups in which of the following ways?  
(A) Naked mole rats exhibit an extreme form of altruism.  
(B) Naked mole rats are cooperative breeders.  
(C) Among naked mole rats, many males are permitted to breed with a single 
dominant female.  
(D) Among naked mole rats, different tasks are performed at different times in an 
individual s life.  
(E) Among naked mo le rats, fighting results in the selection of a breeding female . 
7. One function of the third paragraph of the passage is to  
(A) state a conclusion about facts presented in an earlier paragraph  
(B) introduce information that is contradicted by information in the fourth 
paragraph  
(C) qualify the extent to which two previously mentioned groups might be similar  
(D) show the chain of reasoning  that led to the conclusions of a specific study  
(E) demonstrate that of three explanatory factors offered, two may be of equal 
significance