The idea of building New Towns  to absorb growth is frequently considered a cure -all for 
urban problems. It is erroneously assumed that if new residents can be diverted from existing 
centers, the present urban situation at least will get no worse. It is further and equally 
erroneously assumed that since European New Towns have been financial ly and socially 
successful, we can expect the same sorts of results in the United States.  
Present planning, thinking, and legislation will not produce the kinds of New Town that 
have been successful abroad. It will multiply suburbs or encourage development s in areas 
where land is cheap and construction profitable rather than where New Towns are genuinely 
needed . 
Such ill -considered projects not only will fail to relieve pressures on existing  cities but will, 
in fact, tend to weaken those cities further by d rawing away high -income citizens and 250 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 increasing the concentration of low -income groups that are unable to provide tax income. The 
remaining taxpayers , accordingly, will face increasing burdens , and industry and commerce will 
seek escape. Unfortunately , this mechanism is already at work in some metropolitan areas.  
The promoters of New Towns so far in the United States have been developers, builders, 
and financial institutions. The main interest of these promoters is economic gain. Furthermore , 
federal regula tions designed to promote the New Town idea do not consider social needs as the 
European New Town plans do. In fact, our regulations specify virtually all the ingredients of the 
typical suburban  community, with a bit of political rhetoric thrown in.  
A workable American  New Town formula should be established as firmly here as the 
national formula was in Britain. All possible social and governmental innovations as well as 
financial factors should be thoroughly considered and accommodated in this policy. Its 
objectives should be clearly stated, and both incentives and penalties should be provided to 
ensure that the objectives are pursued. If such a policy is developed, then the New Town 
approach can play an important role in alleviating America s urban problems . 
1. The passage contains information that answers which of the following  questions?  
(A) Where did the idea of New Towns originate?  
(B) How does Britain s New Town formula differ from that of other European 
countries?  
(C) What is the purpose of building Ne w Towns?  
(D) What incentives and penalties will be necessary  to make a New Town 
formula workable?  
(E) Why have European New Towns been financially successful?  
2. The author believes that New Towns are not being built where they are genuinely 
needed because  
(A) the government offers  developers incentives to build in other areas  
(B) the promoters of New Town are motivated chiefly by self -interest  
(C) few people want to live in areas where land is still cheap  
(D) no studies have been done to determine the best locations  
(E) federal regulations make construction in those areas less profitable  
3. Acco rding to the author, ill -considered New Towns will tend to weaken existing 
cities in which of the following ways?  
I. They will cause an erosion in the tax base of existing cities.  
II. The will divert residents from existing cities to other areas.  
III. They  will increase the number of low -income residents in existing cities.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III   GMAT  251 
 4. According to the passage, as compared with American New Towns, European 
New Towns have been designed with greater concern for  
(A) social needs  
(B) financial factors  
(C) urban congestion  
(D) the profits of developers and builders  
(E) the environment  
5. The author s tone in discussing developers, builders, and financial  institutions  
(lines 25 -26) can best be described as  
(A) critical  
(B) pedantic  
(C) evasive  
(D) captious  
(E) vitriolic  
6. It can be inferred  from the passage that the  author believes which of the following 
about suburbs?  
(A) They are a panacea for urban problems.  
(B) They will soon be plagued by the same problems that now plague cities.  
(C) They are poor models for New Towns.  
(D) They drive up property values in inner cities.  
(E) They alleviate some, but not all, of America s urban problems.  
7. It can be inferred  from the passage that the author considers the present American 
New  Town formula to be  
(A) thoroughly considered  
(B) insufficiently innovative  
(C) potentially work able 
(D) overly restrictive  
(E) financially  sound  
8. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) arguing for a change in policy  
(B) exploring the implications of novel idea  
(C) comparing and contrasting two manifestations of the same pheno menon  
(D) proposing a radically new solution to an old problem  
(E) summarizing recent research on a topic