During the 1960s and 1970s, the primary economic development strategy of local  GMAT  269 
 governments in the United States was to attract manufactu ring industries. Unfortunately, this 
strategy was usually implemented at another communitys expense: many manufacturing 
facilities were lured away from their moorings elsewhere through tax incentives and slick 
promotional efforts. Through the transfer of jobs and related revenues that resulted from this 
practice, one towns triumph could become another towns tragedy.  
In the 1980s the strategy shifted from this zero -sum game  to one called high -technology 
development, in which local governments competed to attract newly formed high -technology 
manufacturing firms. Although this approach was preferable to victimizing other geographical 
areas by taking the ir jobs, it also had its shortcomings: high -tech manufacturing firms employ 
only a specially trained fraction of the manufacturing workforce, and there simply are not 
enough high -tech firms to satisfy all geographic areas.  
Recently, local governments have increasingly come to recognize the advantages of yet a 
third strategy: the promotion of homegrown small businesses. Small indigenous businesses are 
created by a nearly ubiquitous resource, local entrepreneurs. With roots in their communities, 
these individ uals are less likely to be enticed away by incentives offered by another community. 
Indigenous industry and talent are kept at home, creating an environment that both provides 
jobs and fosters further entrepreneurship.  
144. The primary purpose of the passa ge is to  
(A) advocate more effective strategies for encouraging the development of 
high-technology enterprises in the United States  
(B) contrast the incentives for economic development offered by local 
governments with those offered by the private sector  
(C) acknowledge and counter adverse criticism of programs being used to 
stimulate local economic development  
(D) define and explore promotional efforts used by local governments to attract 
new industry  
(E) review and evaluate strategies and programs that have been used to stimulate 
economic development  
145. The passage suggests which of the following about the majority of United States 
manufacturing industries before the high -technology development e ra of the 
1980s?  
(A) They lost many of their most innovative personnel to small entrepreneurial 
enterprises.  
(B) They experienced a major decline in profits during the 1960s and 1970s.  
(C) They could provide real economic benefits to the areas in which they were 
located.  
(D) They employed workers who had no specialized skills.  
(E) They actively interfered with local entrepreneurial ventures.  
146. The tone of the passage suggests that the author is most optimistic about the 
economic development potential of which of the following groups?  270 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) Local governments  
(B) High -technol ogy promoters  
(C) Local entrepreneurs  
(D) Manufacturing -industry managers  
(E) Economic development strategists  
147. The passage does NOT state which of the following about local entrepreneurs?  
(A) They are found nearly everywhere.  
(B) They encourage fur ther entrepreneurship.  
(C) They attract out -of-town investors.  
(D) They employ local workers.  
(E) They are established in their communities.  
148. The author of the passage mentions which of the following as an advantage of 
high-technology development?  
(A) It encourages the modernization of existing manufacturing facilities.  
(B) It promotes healthy competition between rival industries.  
(C) It encourages the growth of related industries.  
(D) It takes full advantage of the existing workforce.  
(E) It does  not advantage one local workforce at the expense of another.