Maps made by non -Native Americans to depict Native American land tenure , resources and 
population distributions appeared almost as early as Europeans first encounters with Native  
Americans and took many form: missionaries field sketches, explorers drawings, and 
surveyors maps, as well as maps rendered in connection with treaties involving land transfers. 
Most existing maps of Native American lands are reconstructions that are b ased largely on 
archaeology, oral reports, and evidence gathered from observers accounts in letter, diaries, and 
official reports; accordingly, the accuracy of these maps is especially dependent on the 
mapmakers own interpretive abilities.  
Many existing maps also reflect the 150 -year role of the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) in 
administering tribal lands. Though these maps incorporate some information gleaned directly 
from Native Americans, rarely has Native American cartography contributed to this offic ial 
record, which has been compiled, surveyed, and authenticated by non -Native American . Thus 
our current cartographic record  relating to Native American  tribes and their migrations and 
cultural features, as well as territoriality and contemporary trust lands, reflects the origins of the 
data, the mixed purposes for which the maps have been prepared, and changes both in United 
States government policy and in non -Native Americans attitudes toward an understanding of 
Native Americans.   GMAT  285 
 268. Which of the following best describes the content of the passage?  
(A) A chronology of the development of different methods for mapping Nat ive 
Americans  
(B) A discussion of how the mapmaking techniques of Native Americans differed 
from those of Europeans  
(C) An argument concerning the present -day uses to which historical maps of 
Native American lands are put  
(D) An argument concerning the nat ure of information contained in maps of 
Native American lands  
(E) A proposal for improving the accuracy of maps of Native American lands  
269. The passage mentions each of the following as a factor affecting current maps of 
Native American lands EXCEPT  
(A) United States government policy  
(B) non -Native Americans perspective on Native Americans  
(C) origins of the information utilized to produce the maps  
(D) changes in ways that tribal lands are used  
(E) the reason for producing the maps  
270. The passag e suggests which of the following about most existing maps of Native 
American lands?  
(A) They do not record the migrations of Native American tribes.  
(B) They have been preserved primarily because of their connection with treaties 
involving land transfers.  
(C) They tend to reflect archaeological evidence that has become outdated.  
(D) They tend to be less accurate when they are based on oral reports than when 
they are based on written documents.  
(E) They are not based primarily on the mapmakers firsthand observations of 
Native American lands.  
271. All of the following are examples of the type of evidence used in creating Most 
existing maps (line 7 -8) EXCEPT  
(A) a nineteenth -century governme nt report on population distribution of a 
particular tribe  
(B) taped conversations with people who lived on Native American  tribal lands in 
the early twentieth century  
(C) aerial photographs of geological features of lands inhabited by Native 
Americans  
(D) findings from a recently excavated site once inhabited by a certain Native 
American people  
(E) a journal kept by a non -Native American explorer who traveled in Native 
American territory in the early nineteenth century  286 GMAT, GRE, LSAT 