In 1896 a Georgia couple suing for  damages in the accidental death of their two year old  
was told that since the child had made no real economic contribution to the family, there was no 
liability for damages. In contrast, less than a century later, in 1979, the parents of a 
three-year-old sued in New York for accidental -death damages and won an award of $750,000.  
The transformation in social values implicit in juxtaposing these two incidents is the subject  GMAT  43 
 of Viviana Zelizers excellent book, Pricing the Priceless Child . During the nineteenth century, 
she argues, the concept of the useful ch ild who contributed to the family economy gave way 
gradually to the present -day notion of the useless child who, though producing no income for, 
and indeed extremely costly to, its parents, is yet considered emotionally priceless. Well 
established amon g segments of the middle and upper classes by the mid -1800s, this new view 
of childhood spread throughout society in the late-nineteenth and early -twentieth centuries as 
reformers introduced child -labor regulations and compulsory education  laws predicated in part 
on the assumption that a childs emotional value made child labor taboo.  
For Zelizer the origins of this transformation were many and complex. The gradual erosion 
of childrens productive value in a maturing industri al economy, the decline in birth and death 
rates, especially in child mortality, and the development of the companionate family (a family in 
which members were united by explicit bonds of love rather than duty) were all factors critical 
in changing the ass essment of childrens worth. Yet expulsion of children from the  cash nexus , 
although clearly shaped by profound changes in the economic, occupational, and family 
structures, Zelizer maintains, was also part of a cultural process of sacrelization of childrens 
lives. Protecting children from the crass busines s world became enormously important for 
late-nineteenth -century middle -class Americans, she suggests; this sacralization was a way of 
resisting what they perceived as the relentless corruption of human values by the marketplace.  
In stressing the cultural d eterminants of a childs worth , Zelizer takes issue with 
practitioners of the new sociological economics, who have analyzed such traditionally 
sociological topics as crime, marriage, education, and health solely in terms of their economic 
determinants. A llowing only a small role for cultural forces in the form of individual 
preferences, these sociologists tend to view all human behaviors as directed primarily by the 
principle of maximizing economic gain. Zelizer is highly critical of this approach, and 
emphasizes instead the opposite phenomenon: the power of social values to transform price. 
As children became more valuable in emotional terms, she argues, their exchange or 
surrender value on the market, that is, the conversion of their intangible wor th into cash 
terms, became much greater.  
1. It can be inferred from the passage that accidental -death damage awards in 
America during the nineteenth century tended to be based principally on the  
(A) earnings of the person at time of death  
(B) wealth of the  party causing the death  
(C) degree of culpability of the party causing the death  
(D) amount of money that had been spent on the person killed  
(E) amount of suffering endured by the family of the person killed  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that in the early 1800s children were 
generally regarded by their families as individuals who  
(A) needed enormous amounts of security and affecti on 
(B) required constant supervision while working  
(C) were important to the economic well -being of a family  
(D) were unsuited to spending long hours in school  44 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) were financial burdens assumed for the good of society  
3. Which of the following alternat ive explanations of the change in the cash value of 
children would be most likely to be put forward by sociological economists as 
they are described in the passage?  
(A) The cash value of children rose during the nineteenth century because parents 
began to increase their emotional investment in the upbringing of their 
children.  
(B) The cash value of children rose during the nineteenth century because their 
expected earnings over the course of a lifetime increased greatly.  
(C) The cash value of children rose during the nineteenth century because the 
spread of humanitarian ideals resulted in a wholesale reappraisal of the 
worth of an individual . 
(D) The cash value of children rose during the nineteenth century because 
compulsory education laws reduced the suppl y, and thus raised the costs, of 
available child labor.  
(E) The cash value of children rose during the nineteenth century because of 
changes in the way negligence law assessed damages in accidental  death 
cases.  
4. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) review the literature in a new academic sub -field 
(B) present the central thesis of a recent book  
(C) contrast two approaches to analyzing historical change  
(D) refute a traditional explanation of a social phenomenon  
(E) encourage further work on a neglected historical topic  
5. It can be inferred from  the passage that which of the following statements was 
true of American families over the course of the nineteenth century?  
(A) The average size of families grew considerably . 
(B) The percentage of families involved in industrial work declined dramaticall y. 
(C) Family members became more emotionally bonded to one another.  
(D) Family members spent an increasing amount of time working with each other.  
(E) Family members became more economically dependent on each other.  
6. Zelizer refers to all of the following as important influences in changing the 
assessment of childrens worth EXCEPT changes in  
(A) the mortality rate  
(B) the nature of industry  
(C) the nature of the family  
(D) attitudes toward reform movements  
(E) attitudes toward the marketplace   GMAT  45 
 7. Which of the following would be most consistent with the practices of 
sociological economics as these practices are described in the passage?  
(A) Ar guing that most health -care professionals enter the field because they 
believe it to be the most socially useful of any occupation  
(B) Arguing that most college students choose majors that they believe will lead 
to the most highly paid jobs available to th em 
(C) Arguing that most decisions about marriage and divorce are based on rational 
assessments of the likelihood that each partner will remain committed to the 
relationship  
(D) Analyzing changes in the number of people enrolled in colleges and 
universitie s as a function of changes in the economic health of these 
institutions  
(E) Analyzing changes in the ages at which people get married as a function of a 
change in the average number of years that young people have lived away 
from their parents  
Passage 1 7 (17/63)  
Prior to 1975, union efforts to organize public -sector clerical workers, most of whom are 
women, were somewhat limited. The factors favoring unionization drives seem to have been 
either the presence of large numbers of workers, as in New York Cit y, to make it worth the 
effort, or the concentration of small numbers in one or two locations, such as a hospital, to 
make it relatively easy . Receptivity to unionization on the workers part was also a consideration, 
but when there were large numbers invo lved or the clerical workers were the only unorganized 
group in a jurisdiction, the multi -occupational unions would often try to organize them 
regardless of the workers initial receptivity. The strategic reasoning was based, first, on the 
concern that pol iticians and administrators might play off  unionized against non -unionized 
workers, and, second, on the conviction that a fully unionized public work force meant power, 
both at the bargaining table and in the legislature. In localities where clerical workers were few 
in number, were scattered in several workplaces, and expressed no interest in being organized, 
unions more often than not ignored them in the pre -1975 period.  
But since the mid -1970s, a different strategy has emerged. In 1977, 34 percent of 
government clerical workers we re represented by a labor organization, compared with 46 
percent of government professionals, 44 percent of government blue -collar workers, and 41 
percent of government service workers . Since then, however, the biggest increases in 
public -sector unionizati on have been among clerical workers. Between 19 77 and 1980, the 
number of unionized government workers in blue -collar and service occupations increased only 
about  1.5 percent, while in the white -collar occupations the increase was 20 percent and 
among cler ical workers in particular, the increase was 22 percent.  
What accounts for this upsurge in unionization among clerical workers? First, more women 
have entered the work force in the past few years, and more of them plan to remain working 
until retirement ag e. Consequently, they are probably more concerned than their predecessors 
were about job security and economic benefits. Also, the womens movement has succeeded in 46 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 legitimizing the economic and political activism of women on their own behalf, thereby 
producing a more positive attitude toward unions. The absence of any comparable increase in 
unionization among private -sector clerical workers, however, identifies the primary 
catalyst the structural change in the multi -occupational public -sector unions themse lves. Over 
the past twenty years, the occupational distribution in these unions has been steadily shifting 
from predominantly blue -collar to predominantly white -collar. Because there are far more 
women in white -collar jobs, an increase in the proportion of  female members has accompanied 
the occupational shift and has altered union policy -making in favor of organizing women and 
addressing womens issues.  
1. According to the passage, the public -sector workers who were most likely to 
belong to unions in 1977 w ere 
(A) professionals  
(B) managers  
(C) clerical workers  
(D) service workers  
(E) blue -collar workers  
2. The author cites union efforts to achieve a fully unionized work force ( line 13 -19) 
in order to account for why  
(A) politic ians might try to oppose public -sector union organizing  
(B) public -sector unions have recently focused on organizing women  
(C) early organizing efforts often focused on areas where there were large 
numbers of workers  
(D) union efforts with regard to public -sector clerical workers increased 
dramatically after 1975  
(E) unions sometimes tried to organize workers regardless of the workers initial 
interest in unionization  
3. The authors claim that, since the mid -1970s, a new strategy has emerged in the 
unionization of public -sector clerical workers ( line 23 ) would be strengthened if 
the author  
(A) described more fully the attitudes of clerical workers toward labor unions  
(B) compared the organizing strategies employed by private -sector unions with 
those of public -sector unions  
(C) explai ned why politicians and administrators sometimes oppose unionization 
of clerical workers  
(D) indicated that the number of unionized public -sector clerical workers was 
increasing even before the mid -1970s  
(E) showed that the factors that favored unionization drives among these workers 
prior to 1975 have decreased in importance  
4. According to the passage, in the period prior to 1975, each of the following  GMAT  47 
 considerations helped determine whether a union would attempt to organize a 
certain group of clerical workers EXCEPT  
(A) the number of clerical workers in that group  
(B) the number of women among the clerical workers in that group  
(C) whether the clerical workers in that area were concentrated in one wo rkplace 
or scattered over several workplaces  
(D) the degree to which the clerical workers in that group were interested in 
unionization  
(E) whether all the other workers in the same jurisdiction as that group of clerical 
workers were unionized  
5. The author states that which of the following is a consequence of the womens 
movement of recent years?  
(A) An increase in the number of wome n entering the work force  
(B) A structural change in multi -occupational public -sector unions  
(C) A more positive attitude on the part of women toward unions  
(D) An increase in the proportion of clerical workers that are women  
(E) An increase in the numb er of women in administrative positions  
6. The main concern of the passage is to  
(A) advocate particular strategies for future efforts to organize certain workers 
into labor unions  
(B) explain differences in the unionized proportions of various groups of 
public -sector workers  
(C) evaluate the effectiveness of certain kinds of labor unions that represent 
public -sector workers  
(D) analyzed and explain an increase in unionization among a certain category of 
workers  
(E) describe and distinguish strategies appropriate to organizing different 
categories of workers  
7. The author implies that if the increase in the number of women in the work force 
and the impact of the womens movement were the main causes of the ris e in 
unionization of public -sector clerical workers, then  
(A) more women would hold administrative positions in unions  
(B) more women who hold political offices would have positive attitudes toward 
labor unions  
(C) there would be an equivalent rise in unio nization of private -sector clerical 
workers  
(D) unions would have shown more interest than they have in organizing women  
(E) the increase in the number of unionized public -sector clerical workers would 
have been greater than it has been  48 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 8. The author suggests that it would be disadvantageous to a union if  
(A) many workers in the locality were not unionized  
(B) the union contributed to political campaigns  
(C) the union included only public -sector workers  
(D) the union included workers from several jurisdictions  
(E) the union included members from only a few occupations  
9. The author implies that, in comparison with work ing women today, women 
working in the years prior to the mid -1970s showed a greater tendency to  
(A) prefer smaller workplaces  
(B) express a positive attitude toward labor unions  
(C) maximize job security and economic benefits  
(D) side with administrators in labor disputes  
(E) quit working prior of retirement age