Many United States companies have, unfortunately, made the search for legal protecti on 
from import competition into a major line of work. Since 1980 the United States International 
Trade Commission (ITC) has received about 280 complaints alleging damage from imports that 
benefit from subsidies by foreign governments. Another 340 charge th at foreign companies 60 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 dumped their products in the United States at less than fair value. Even when no unfair 
practices are alleged, the simple claim that an industry has been injured by imports is sufficient 
grounds to seek relief.  
Contrary to the gene ral impression, this quest for import relief has hurt more companies 
than it has helped. As corporations begin to function globally, they develop an intricate web of 
marketing, production, and research relationships . The complexity of these relationships m akes 
it unlikely that a system of import relief laws will meet the strategic needs of all the units under 
the same parent company.  
Internationalization increases the danger that foreign companies will use import relief laws 
against the very companies the l aws were designed to protect. Suppose a United States -owned 
company establishes an overseas plant to manufacture a product while its competitor makes 
the same product in the United States. If the competitor can prove injury from the 
imports and that the Un ited States company received a subsidy from a foreign government to 
build its plant abroad the United States companys products will be uncompetitive in the 
United States, since they would be subject to duties.  
Perhaps the most brazen  case occurred when the ITC investigated allegations that 
Canadian companies were injuring the United States salt industry by dumping rock salt , used to 
de-ice roads. The bizarre aspect of the complaint was that a foreign c onglomerate with United 
States operations was crying for  help against a United States company with foreign operations. 
The United States company claiming injury was a subsidiary of a Dutch conglomerate, while 
the Canadian companies  included a subsidiary of a Chicago firm that was the second -largest 
domestic producer of rock salt.  
1. The passage is chiefly concerned with  
(A) arguing against the increased internationalization of United States 
corporations  
(B) warning that the applicat ion of laws affecting trade frequently has unintended 
consequences  
(C) demonstrating that foreign -based firms receive more subsidies from their 
governments than United States firms receive from the United States 
government  
(D) advocating the use of trade r estrictions for dumped products but not for 
other imports  
(E) recommending a uniform method for handling claims of unfair trade practices  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that the minimal basis for a complaint to the 
International Trade Commissi on is which of the following?  
(A) A foreign competitor has received a subsidy from a foreign government.  
(B) A foreign competitor has substantially increased the volume of products 
shipped to the United States.  
(C) A foreign competitor is selling products in the United States at less than fair 
market value.  
(D) The company requesting import relief has been injured by the sale of imports  GMAT  61 
 in the United States.  
(E) The company requesting import relief has been barred from exporting 
products to the country of its foreign competitor.  
3. The last paragraph performs which of the following functions in the passage?  
(A) It summarizes the discussion thus far and sug gests additional areas of 
research.  
(B) It presents a recommendation based on the evidence presented earlier.  
(C) It discusses an exceptional case in which the results expected by the author of 
the passage were not obtained.  
(D) It introduces an additional  area of concern not mentioned earlier.  
(E) It cites a specific case that illustrates a problem presented more generally in 
the previous paragraph.  
4. The passage warns of which of the following dangers?  
(A) Companies in the United States may receive no protection from imports 
unless they ac tively seek protection from import competition.  
(B) Companies that seek legal protection from import competition may incur 
legal costs that far exceed any possible gain.  
(C) Companies that are United States -owned but operate internationally may not 
be elig ible for protection from import competition under the laws of the 
countries in which their plants operate.  
(D) Companies that are not United States -owned may seek legal protection from 
import competition under United States import relief laws.  
(E) Companies in the United States that import raw materials may have to pay 
duties on those materials.  
5. The passage suggests that which of the following is most likely to be true of 
United States trade laws?  
(A) They will eliminate the practice of  dumping products in the United States.  
(B) They will enable manufacturers in the United States to compete more 
profitably outside the United States.  
(C) They will affect United States trade with Canada more negatively than trade 
with other nations.  
(D) Th ose that help one unit within a parent company will not necessarily help 
other units in the company.  
(E) Those that are applied to international companies will accomplish their 
intended result.  
6. It can be inferred from the passage that the author believes which of the following 
about the complaint mentioned in the last paragraph?  
(A) The ITC acted u nfairly toward the complainant in its investigation.  
(B) The complaint violated the intent of import relief laws.  62 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) The response of the ITC to the complaint provided suitable relief from unfair 
trade practices to the complainant.  
(D) The ITC did not have  access to appropriate information concerning the case.  
(E) Each of the companies involved in the complaint acted in its own best 
interest.  
7. According to the passage, companies have the general impression that 
International Trade Commission import relief practices have  
(A) caused unpredictable fluctuations in volumes of imports and exports  
(B) achieved their desired effect only under unusual circumstances  
(C) actually helped companies that have requested import relief  
(D) been opposed by the business community  
(E) had less impact on international companies than the business community 
expected  
8. According to the passage, the International Trade Commission is involved in 
which of the following?  
(A) Investigating allegations of unfair import competition  
(B) Granting s ubsidies to companies in the United States that have been injured 
by import competition  
(C) Recommending legislation to ensure fair  
(D) Identifying international corporations that wish to build plants in the United 
States  
(E) Assisting corporations in the United States that wish to compete globally