(This passage was written in 1978.)  
Recent years have brought minority -owned businesses in the United States unprecedented 
opportunities as well as new and significant risks. Civil rights acti vists have long argued that 
one of the principal reasons why Blacks, Hispanics, and other minority groups have difficulty 
establishing themselves in business is that they lack access to the sizable orders and 
subcontracts that are generated by large compan ies. Now Congress, in apparent agreement, 
has required by law that businesses awarded federal contracts of more than $500,000 do their 
best to find minority subcontractors and record their efforts to do so on forms filed with the 
government. Indeed, some f ederal and local agencies have gone so far as to set specific 
percentage goals for apportioning parts of public works contracts to minority enterprises.  
Corporate response appears to have been substantial. According to figures collected in 
1977, the total of corporate contracts with minority businesses rose from $77 million in 1972 to 
$1.1 billion in 1977. The projected total of corporate contracts with minority businesses for the 
early 1980s is estimated to be over 53 billion per year with no letup antici pated in the next 
decade. Promising as it is for minority businesses, this increased patronage poses dangers for 
them, too. First, minority firms risk expanding too fast and overextending themselves financially, 
since most are small concerns and, unlike la rge businesses, they often need to make 
substantial investments in new plants, staff, equipment, and the like in order to perform work 
subcontracted to them. If, thereafter, their subcontracts are for some reason reduced, such 
firms can face potentially cr ippling fixed expenses. The world of corporate purchasing can be 
frustrating for small entrepreneurs who get requests for elaborate formal estimates and bids. 
Both consume valuable time and resources, and a small companys efforts must soon result in 
order s, or both the morale and the financial health of the business will suffer.  
A second risk is that White -owned companies may seek to cash in on the increasing 
apportionments through formation of joint ventures with minority -owned concerns. Of course, 
in man y instances there are legitimate reasons for joint ventures; clearly, White and minority 
enterprises can team up  to acquire business that neither could acquire alone. But civil rights 
groups and minority business owners have co mplained to Congress about minorities being set 
up as  fronts  with White backing, rather than being accepted as full partners in legitimate  joint 
ventures.  
Third, a minority enterprise that secures the business of one large corporate customer 
often runs the danger of becoming and remaining dependent. Even in the best of 
circumstances, fierce competition from larger, more established companies  makes it difficult for 
small concerns to broaden their customer bases: when such firms have nearly guaranteed 
orders from a single corporate benefactor, they may truly have to struggle against complacency 
arising from their current success.  2 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 1. The primary  purpose of the passage is to  
(A) present a commonplace idea and its inaccuracies  
(B) describe a situation and its potential drawbacks  
(C) propose a temporary solution to a problem  
(D) analyze a frequent source of disagreement  
(E) explore the implications of a finding  
2. The passage supplies information that would answer which of the following 
questions?  
(A) What federal agencies have set percentage goals for the use of 
minority -owned businesses in public works contracts?  
(B) To which government agencies must businesses awarded federal contracts 
report their efforts to find minority subcontractors?  
(C) How widespread is the use of minority -owned concerns as fronts by White 
backers seeking to obtain subcontracts?  
(D) How man y more minority -owned businesses were there in 1977 than in 
1972?  
(E) What is one set of conditions under which a small business might find itself 
financially overextended?  
3. According to the passage, civil rights activists maintain that one disadvantage 
under which minority -owned businesses have traditionally had t o labor  is that 
they have  
(A) been especially vulnerable to governmental mismanagement of the economy  
(B) been denied bank loans at rates comparable to those afforded larger 
competitor s 
(C) not had sufficient opportunity to secure business created by large corporations  
(D) not been able to advertise in those media that reach large numbers of potential 
customers  
(E) not had adequate representation in the centers of government power  
4. The passage suggests that the failure of a large business to have its bids for 
subcontracts result quickly in orders might cause it to  
(A) experience frustration but not serious financial harm  
(B) face potentially crippling fixed expenses  
(C) have to record its efforts on forms filed with the government  
(D) increase its spending with minority subcontractors  
(E) revise its procedure for making bids for federal contracts and subc ontracts  
5. The author implies that a minority -owned concern that does the greater part of its 
business with one large corporate customer should  
(A) avoid competition with larger, more established concerns by not expanding   GMAT  3 
 (B) concentrate on securing even more business from that corporation  
(C) try to expand its customer base to avoid becoming dependent on the 
corporation  
(D) pass on some of the work to be done for the corporation to other 
minority -owned concerns  
(E) use its influence with the corporation to promote subcontracting with other 
minority concerns  
6. It can be inferred from the passage that, compared with the requirements of law, 
the percentage goals set by some federal and local agencies (lines 1 4-15) are  
(A) more popular with large corporations  
(B) more specific  
(C) less controversial  
(D) less expensive to enforce  
(E) easier to comply with  
7. Which of the following, if true, would most weaken the authors assertion that, in 
the 1970s, corpora te response to federal requirements (lines 18 -19) was 
substantial  
(A) Corporate contracts with minority -owned businesses totaled $2 billion in 
1979.  
(B) Between 1970 and 1972, corporate contracts with minority -owned businesses 
declined by 25 percent.  
(C) The figures collected in 1977 underrepresented the extent of corporate 
contracts with minority -owned businesses.  
(D) The estimate of corporate spending with minority -owned businesses in 1980 
is approximately $10 million too high.  
(E) The $1.1 billion represented the same percentage of total corporate spending 
in 1977 as did $77 million in 1972.  
8. The author would most likely agree with which of the following statements about 
corporate response to working with minority subcontr actors?  
(A) Annoyed by the proliferation of front organizations, corporations are likely 
to reduce their efforts to work with minority -owned subcontractors in the 
near future.  
(B) Although corporations showed considerable interest in working with minorit y 
businesses in the 1970s, their aversion to government paperwork made them 
reluctant to pursue many government contracts.  
(C) The significant response of corporations in the 1970s is likely to be sustained 
and conceivably be increased throughout the 198 0s. 
(D) Although corporations are eager to cooperate with minority -owned businesses, 
a shortage of capital in the 1970s made substantial response impossible.  4 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) The enormous corporate response has all but eliminated the dangers of 
over-expansion that  used to plague small minority -owned businesses.