(This passage is excerpted from material published in 1980.)  
Federal efforts to aid minority businesses began in the 1960s when the Small Business 
Administration (SBA) began making federally guaranteed loans and government -sponsor ed 
management and technical assistance available to minority business enterprises. While this 
program enabled many minority entrepreneurs to form new businesses, the results were 
disappointing, since managerial inexperience, unfavorable locations, and capi tal shortages led  GMAT  31 
 to high failure rates. Even  years after the program was implemented, minority business receipts 
were not quite two percent of the national economys total receipts.  
Recently federal policymakers have adopted an approach intended to accele rate 
development of the minority business sector by moving away from directly aiding small minority 
enterprises and toward supporting larger, growth -oriented minority firms through intermediary 
companies. In this approach, large corporations participate in  the development of successful 
and stable minority businesses by making use of government -sponsored venture capital. The 
capital is used by a participating company to establish a Minority Enterprise Small Business 
Investment Company or MESBIC. The MESBIC t hen provides capital and guidance to minority 
businesses that have potential to become future suppliers or customers of the sponsoring 
company.  
MESBICs are the result of the belief that providing established firms with easier access to 
relevant management  techniques and more job -specific experience, as well as substantial 
amounts of capital, gives those firms a greater opportunity to develop sound business 
foundations than does simply making general management experience and small amounts of 
capital availa ble. Further, since potential markets for the minority businesses already exist 
through the sponsoring companies, the minority businesses face considerably less risk in terms 
of location and market fluctuation. Following early financial and operating probl ems, sponsoring 
corporations began to capitalize MESBICs far above the legal minimum of $500,000 in order to 
generate sufficient income and to sustain the quality of management needed. MESBIC s are 
now emerging as increasingly important financing sources for minority enterprises.  
Ironically, MESBIC staffs, which usually consist of Hispanic and Black professionals, tend to 
approach investments in minority firms more pragmatically than do many MESBIC directors, 
who are usually senior managers from sponsoring  corporations. The latter often still think 
mainly in terms of the social responsibility approach and thus seem to prefer deals that are 
riskier and less attractive than normal investment criteria would warrant. Such differences in 
viewpoint have produce d uneasiness among many minority staff members, who feel that 
minority entrepreneurs and businesses should be judged by established business 
considerations. These staff members believe their point of view is closer to the original 
philosophy of MESBICs an d they are concerned that, unless a more prudent course is followed, 
MESBIC directors may revert to  policies likely to re -create the disappointing results of the 
original SBA approach.  
1. Which of the following best states the central  idea of the passage?  
(A) The use of MESBICs for aiding minority entrepreneurs seems to have 
greater potential for success than does the original SBA approach.  
(B) There is a crucial difference in point of view between the staff and directors 
of some MESB ICs.  
(C) After initial problems with management and marketing, minority businesses 
have begun to expand at a steady rate.  
(D) Minority entrepreneurs wishing to form new businesses now have several 
equally successful federal programs on which to rely.  
(E) For the first time since 1960, large corporations are making significant 32 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 contributions to the development of minority businesses.  
2. According to the passage, the MESBIC approach differs from the SBA approach 
in that MESBICs  
(A) seek federal contr acts to provide markets for minority businesses  
(B) encourage minority businesses to provide markets for other minority 
businesses  
(C) attempt to maintain a specified rate of growth in the minority business sector  
(D) rely on the participation of large cor porations to finance minority businesses  
(E) select minority businesses on the basis of their location  
3. Which of the following does the author cite to support the conclusion that the 
results of the SBA program were disappointing?  
(A) The small number of new minority enterprises formed as a result of the 
program  
(B) The small number of minority enterprises that took advantage of the 
management and technical assistance offered under the program  
(C) The small percentage of the nations business receipts earned by minority 
enterprises following the programs, implementation  
(D) The small percentage of recipient minority enterprises that were able to repay 
federally guaranteed loans made under the program  
(E) The small number of minority enterprises that chose to participate in the 
program  
4. Which of the following statements about the SBA program can be inferred from 
the passage?  
(A) The maximum term for loans made to recipient businesses was 15 years.  
(B) Business loans were considered to be more useful to recipient businesses than 
was management and technical assistance.  
(C) Th e anticipated failure rate for recipient businesses was significantly lower 
than the rate that actually resulted.  
(D) Recipient businesses were encouraged to relocate to areas more favorable for 
business development.  
(E) The capitalization needs of reci pient businesses were assessed and then 
provided for adequately.  
5. Based on information in the passage, which of the following would be indicative 
of the pragmatism of MESBIC staff members?  
I. A reluctance to invest in minority businesses that show margin al 
expectations of return on the investments  
II. A desire to invest in minority businesses that produce goods and services 
likely to be of use to the sponsoring company  
III. A belief that the minority business sector is best served by investing  GMAT  33 
 primarily i n newly established businesses  
(A) I only  
(B) III only 
(C) I and  II only 
(D) II and III only 
(E) I, II and III 
6. The author refers to the financial and operating problems  (line 38 ) encountered 
by MESBICs primarily in order  to 
(A) broaden the scope of the discussion to include the legal considerations of 
funding MESBICS through sponsoring companies  
(B) call attention to the fact that MESBICs must receive adequate funding in 
order to function effectively  
(C) show that spons oring companies were willing to invest only $500,000 of 
government -sponsored venture capital in the original MESBICs  
(D) compare SBA and MESBIC limits on minimum funding  
(E) refute suggestions that MESBICs have been only marginally successful  
7. The authors primary objective in the passage is to  
(A) disprove the view that federal efforts to aid minority businesses have been 
ineffective  
(B) explain how federal efforts  to aid minority businesses have changed since the 
1960s  
(C) establish a direct link between the federal efforts to aid minority businesses 
made before the 1960s and those made in the 1980s  
(D) analyze the basis for the belief that job -specific experien ce is more useful to 
minority businesses than is general management experience  
(E) argue that the social responsibility approach to aiding minority businesses 
is superior to any other approach  
8. It can be inferred from the passage that the attitude of some MESBIC staff 
members toward the investments preferred by some MESBIC di rectors can best 
be described as  
(A) defensive  
(B) resigned  
(C) indifferent  
(D) shocked  
(E) disapproving  
9. The passage provides information that would answer which of the following 
questions?  
(A) What was the average annual amount, in dollars, of minor ity business receipts 34 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 before the SBA strategy was implemented?  
(B) What locations are considered to be unfavorable for minority businesses?  
(C) What is the current success rate for minority businesses that are capitalized by 
MESBICs?  
(D) How has the use o f federal funding for minority businesses changed since the 
1960s?  
(E) How do minority businesses apply to participate in a MESBIC program?