Radiation occurs from three natural sources: radioactive material in the environment, such 
as in soil, rock, or building materials; c osmic rays; and substances in the human body, such as 
radioactive potassium in bone and radioactive carbon in tissues. These natural sources account 
for an exposure of about 100 millirems a year for the average American.  
The largest single source of man -made radiation is medical X rays, yet most scientists  
agree that hazards from this source are not as great as those from weapons test fallout, since 
strontium  90 and carbon 14 become incorporated into the body, hence delivering radiation for 
an entire lifeti me. The issue is, however, by no means uncontroversial. The last two decades 
have witnessed intensified examination and dispute about the effects of low -level radiation, 
beginning with the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiat ion, 
which reported in 1958 that even the smallest amounts of radiation are likely to cause 
deleterious genetic and perhaps also somatic effects . 
A survey conducted in Britain confirmed that an abnormally  high percentage of patients 
suffering from arthritis of the spine who had been treated  with X rays contracted cancer. 
Another study  revealed a high incidence of childhood cancer in cases where the mother had 
been given prenatal pelvic X rays. These studies have pointed to the need to reexamine the 
assumption that exposure to low -linear energy transfer  presents only a minor  risk. 
Recently, examinat ion of the death certificates of former employees of a West Coast plant 
that produces plutonium for nuclear weapons revealed markedly higher rates for cancers of the 
pancreas, lung, bone marrow , and lymphatic system  than would have been expected in a 
normal population.  
While the National Academy of Sciences committee attributes  this difference to chemical or 
other environmental causes  rather than radiation , other scientists maintain that any radiation 
exposure , no matter how small, leads to an increase in cancer risk. It is believed by some that 
a dose of one rem, if sustained over many generations, would lead to an increase  of 1 percent 
in the number of serious genetic defects  at birth,  a possible increase of 1,000 disorders per 
million births.  
In the meantime, regulatory efforts have been disorganized, fragmented, inconsistent, and 
characterized by internecine strife and bureaucratic delays. A Senate report concluded that 
coordination o f regulation among involved departments and agencies was not possible because 
of jurisdictional disputes and confusion. One federal agency has been unsuccessful in its efforts 
to obtain sufficient funding and manpower for the enforcement of existing radiat ion laws, and 
the chairperson of a panel especially created to develop a coordinated federal program has 
resigned.   GMAT  245 
 1. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) explain the difference between natural and man -made radiation  
(B) arouse concern about the ri sks connected with exposure to radiation  
(C) criticize the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects  of Atomic 
Radiation  
(D) advocate limiting the use of atomic weapons  testing, since the fallout is 
extremely hazardous  
(E) publicize the results of British medical survey  
2. Which of the following , according to the passage, is a list of three natural sources 
of radiation?  
(A) Radioactive potassium in bone, strontium 90, uranium ore  
(B) Carbon 14 in tissues, cosmic rays , X rays  
(C) Cosmic rays, radioactive potassium in bones, radioactive carbon in tissues  
(D) Plutonium, radioactive material in rock, strontium 90  
(E) X rays, carbon 14, plutonium  
3. Which of the following does the author cite in support of the quotation  from the 
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (lines 
18-20)? 
I. Strontium 90 and carbon 14 become incorporated into the body and deliver 
radiation for an entire lifetime.  
II. An abnormally high percentage of patients with arthritis of the spine who 
were treated with X rays subsequently contracted cancer . 
III. A high incidence of cancer appeared among children of mothers who had 
been given prenatal pelvic X rays.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
4. The passage contains information that answers which of the following questions?  
(A) How many millirems of radiation from man -made sources is the average 
American exposed to each year?  
(B) Is exposure to radiation linked to any oth er diseases besides cancer?  
(C) How many types of radiation are there?  
(D) What is the maximum level of radiation to which humans can safely be 
exposed?  
(E) Why is exposure to the fallout from weapons testing considered by some to be 
more hazardous than  exposure to X rays?  246 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 5. According to the passage, some scientists believe that a dose of one rem of 
radiation continued over a period of generations would  
(A) raise the strontium 90 levels in the body but otherwise have little effect  
(B) relieve the acute suffering of those afflicted with arthritis  of the spine without 
side effects  
(C) have the effect of increasing by 1 percent the cases of serious genetic defects  
(D) have little impact  on the regulatory efforts of federal agencies  
(E) cause an additional  1,000 per million cases of cancer of the bone marrow or 
lymphatic system  
6. It can be inferred  from the last paragraph of the passage that the chairperson who 
resigned from the panel to develop a coordinated federal program for radiation 
regulation most likely did so because  
(A) he or she disagreed with the findings of the Senate committee  
(B) his or her agency could not obtain funding or manpower  for implementation 
of existing laws  
(C) he or she supported the position of the Nat ional Academy of Sciences 
committee and opposed regulation of radiation exposure  
(D) he or she was disorganized and inconsistent in chairing the panel  
(E) regulatory efforts  have been balked by disputes, confusion, and bureaucratic 
delays  
7. The passage contains evidence suggesting that it was most likely written  
(A) in 1958  
(B) by a British scientist  
(C) for the journal of the National Academy of Sc iences  
(D) by a lobbyist for the defense industry  
(E) in the late 1970s  
8. The passage implies that each of the following statements about radiation has 
been disputed EXCEPT?  
(A) Even small doses of radiation are likely to cause birth defects.  
(B) Expos ure to low -linear energy transfer presents only a minor risk.  
(C) Many small doses of radiation are as harmful as a single large dose.  
(D) Humans can tolerate a certain amount of radiation.  
(E) Exposure to radiation causes cancer.