The modern multinational corporation  is described as having originate d when the 
owner -managers of nineteenth -century British firms carrying on international trade were 
replaced by teams of salaried managers organized into hierarchies. Increases in the volume of 
transactions in such firms are commonly believed to have necess itated this structural change. 
Nineteenth -century inventions like the steamship and the telegraph, by facilitating coordination 274 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 of managerial activities, are described as key factors. Sixteenth - and seventeenth -century 
chartered trading companies, despite the international scope of their activities, are usually 
considered irrelevant to this discussion: the volume of their transactions is assumed to have 
been too low and the communications and transport of their day too primitive to make 
comparisons with mod ern multinationals interesting.  
In reality, however, early trading companies successfully purchased and outfitted ships, 
built and operated offices and warehouses, manufactured trade goods for use abroad, 
maintained trading posts and production facilities overseas, procured goods for import, and 
sold those goods both at home and in other countries. The large volume of transactions 
associated with these activities seems to have necessitated hierarchical management structures 
well before the advent of modern communications and transportation. For example, in the 
Hudsons Bay Company, each far -flung trading outpost was managed by a salaried agent, who 
carried out the trade with the Native Americans, managed day -to-day operations, and oversaw 
the posts workers and servants. One chief agent, answerable to the Court of Directors  in 
London through the correspondence committee, was appointed with control over all of the 
agents on the bay.  
The early trading companies did differ strikingly from modern multinationals in many 
respects.  They depended heavily on the national govern ments of their home countries and thus 
characteristically acted abroad to promote national interests. Their top managers were typically 
owners with a substantial minority share , whereas senior managers holdings in modern 
multination als are usually insignificant. They operated in a pre -industrial world, grafting a 
system of capitalist international trade onto a pre -modern system of artisan and peasant 
production.  Despite these differences, however, early trading companies organized ef fectively 
in remarkably modern ways and merit further study as analogues of more modern structures.  
241. The authors main point is that  
(A) modern multinationals originated in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
with the establishment of chartered tra ding companies  
(B) the success of early chartered trading companies, like that of modern 
multinationals, depended primarily on their ability to carry out complex 
operations  
(C) early chartered trading companies should be more seriously considered by 
schola rs studying the origins of modern multinationals  
(D) scholars are quite mistaken concerning the origins of modern multinationals  
(E) the management structures of early chartered trading companies are 
fundamentally the same as those of modern multinationals  
242. According to the passage, early chartered trading companies are usually described 
as 
(A) irrelevant to a discussion of the origins of the modern multinational 
corporation  
(B) interesting but ultimately too unusually to be good subjects for economic 
study   GMAT  275 
 (C) analogues of nineteenth -century British trading firms  
(D) rudimentary and very early forms of the modern multination al corporation  
(E) important national institutions because they existed to further the political 
aims of the governments of their home countries  
243. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would characterize the 
activities engaged in by early chartered t rading companies as being  
(A) complex enough in scope to require a substantial amount of planning and 
coordination on the part of management  
(B) too simple to be considered similar to those of a modern multinational 
corporation  
(C) as intricate as those ca rried out by the largest multinational corporations today  
(D) often unprofitable due to slow communications and unreliable means of 
transportation  
(E) hampered by the political demands imposed on them by the governments of 
their home countries  
244. The author lists the various activities of early chartered trading companies in 
order to  
(A) analyze the various ways in which these activities contri buted to changes in 
management structure in such companies  
(B) demonstrate that the volume of business transactions of such companies 
exceeded that of earlier firms  
(C) refute the view that the volume of business undertaken by such companies 
was relatively  low 
(D) emphasize the international scope of these companies operations  
(E) support the argument that such firms coordinated such activities by using 
available means of communication and transport  
245. With which of the following generalizations regarding management structures 
would the author of the passage most probably agree?  
(A) Hierarchical management structures are the most efficient management 
structures possible in a modern context.  
(B) Firms that routinely have a high volume of business transactions find it 
necessary to adopt hierarchical management structures.  
(C) Hierarchical management structures cannot be successfully implemented 
without modern communications and transportation.  
(D) Modern multinational firms with a relatively small volume of business 
transactions usually do not have hierarchically organized man agement 
structures.  
(E) Companies that adopt hierarchical management structures usually do so in 
order to facilitate expansion into foreign trade.  276 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 246. The passage suggests that modern multinationals differ from early chartered 
trading companies in that  
(A) the top managers of modern multinationals own stock in their own companies 
rather than simply receiving a salary  
(B) modern multinationals depend on a system of capitalist international trade 
rather than on less modern trading systems  
(C) modern multi nationals have operations in a number of different foreign 
counties rather than merely in one or two  
(D) the operations of modern multinationals are highly profitable despite the 
more stringent environmental and safety regulations of modern governments  
(E) the overseas operations of modern multinationals are not governed by the 
national interests of their home countries  
247. The author mentions the artisan and peasant production systems of early 
chartered trading companies as an example of  
(A) an are a of operations of these companies that was unhampered by 
rudimentary systems of communications and transport  
(B) a similarity that allows fruitful comparison of these companies with modern 
multinationals  
(C) a positive achievement of these companies in th e face of various difficulties  
(D) a system that could not have emerged in the absence of management 
hierarchies  
(E) a characteristic that distinguishes these companies from modern 
multinationals  
248. The passage suggests that one of the reasons that early chartered trading 
companies deserve comparison with early modern multinationals is  
(A) the degree to which t hey both depended on new technology  
(B) the similar nature of their management structures  
(C) similarities in their top managements degree of ownership in the company  
(D) their common dependence on poli tical stability abroad in order to carry on 
foreign o perations  
(E) their common tendency to revolutionize systems of production