In an attempt to improve the overall performance of clerical workers, many companies 
have introduced computerized p erformance monitoring and control systems (CPMCS) that 
record and report a workers computer -driven activities. However, at least one study has shown 
that such monitoring may not be having the desired effect. In the study, researchers asked 
monitored cleri cal workers and their supervisors how assessments of productivity affected 
supervisors ratings of workers performance. In contrast to unmonitored workers doing the 
same work, who without exception identified the most important element in their jobs as 
customer service, the monitored workers and their supervisors all responded that productivity 
was the critical factor in assigning ratings. This finding suggested that there should have been a 
strong correlation between a monitored workers productivity and the overall rating the worker 
received. However, measures of the relationship between overall rating and individual elements 
of performance clearly supported the conclusion that supervisors gave considerable weight to 
criteria such as attendance, accuracy,  and indications of customer satisfaction.  
It is possible that productivity may be a hygiene factor , that is, if it is too low, it will hurt 
the overall rating. But the evidence suggests that beyond the point at which productivity 
becomes good enough , higher productivity per se is unlikely to improve a rating.  
1. According to the passage, before the final results of the study were known, which 
of the following seemed likely?  
(A) That workers with the highest productivity would also be the most accurate  
(B) That workers who initially achieved high productivity ratings would continue 
to do so consistently  
(C) That the highest performance ratings would be achieved by workers with the 
highest productivity   GMAT  147 
 (D) That the most productive workers would be those w hose supervisors claimed 
to value productivity  
(E) That supervisors who claimed to value productivity would place equal value 
on customer satisfaction  
2. It can be inferred that the author of the passage discusses unmonitored workers  
(line 10) primarily in order to  
(A) compare the ratings of thes e workers with the ratings of monitored workers  
(B) provide an example of a case in which monitoring might be effective  
(C) provide evidence of an inappropriate use of CPMCS  
(D) emphasize the effect that CPMCS may have on workers perceptions of their 
jobs 
(E) illustrate the effect that CPMCS may have on workers ratings  
3. Which of the following, if true, would most clearly have supported the conclusion 
referred to in lines 19 -21? 
(A) Ratings of productivity correlated highly with ratings of both accura cy and 
attendance.  
(B) Electronic monitoring greatly increased productivity.  
(C) Most supervisors based overall ratings of performance on measures of 
productivity alone.  
(D) Overall ratings of performance correlated more highly with measures of 
productivit y than the researchers expected.  
(E) Overall ratings of performance correlated more highly with measures of 
accuracy than with measures of productivity.  
4. According to the passage, a hygiene factor (lines 2223) is an aspect of a 
workers performance that  
(A) has no effect on the ra ting of a workers performance  
(B) is so basic to performance that it is assumed to be adequate for all workers  
(C) is given less importance than it deserves in rating a workers performance  
(D) i s not likely to affect a workers rating unless it is judged  to be inadequate  
(E) is important primarily because of the effect it has on a workers rating  
5. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) explain the need for the introduction of an innovative strategy  
(B) discuss a study of the use of a particular method  
(C) recom mend a course of action  
(D) resolved a difference of opinion  
(E) suggest an alternative approach