How many really suffer as a result of labor market problems? This is one o f the most critical 
yet contentious social policy questions. In many ways, our social statistics exaggerate the 
degree of hardship. Unemployment does not have the same dire consequences today as it did 
in the 1930s when most of the unemployed were primary  breadwinners, when income and 
earnings were usually much closer to the margin of subsistence, and when there were no 
countervailing social programs for those failing in the labor market. Increasing affluence, the 
rise of families with more than one wage e arner, the growing predominance of secondary 
earners among the unemployed, and improved social welfare protection have unquestionably 
mitigated the consequences of joblessness. Earnings and income data also overstate the 
dimensions of hardship. Among the m illions with hourly earnings at or below the minimum 
wage level, the overwhelming majority are from multiple -earner, relatively affluent  families. 
Most of those counted by the poverty statistics are elderly or handicapped or have family 
responsibilities wh ich keep them out of the labor force, so the poverty statistics are by no 
means an accurate indicator of labor market pathologies.  
Yet there are also many ways our social statistics underestimate the degree of 
labor-market -related hardship. The unemploymen t counts exclude the millions of fully 
employed workers whose wages are so low that their families remain in poverty. Low wages 
and repeated or prolonged unemployment frequently interact to undermine the capacity for 
self-support. Since the number experien cing joblessness at some time during the year is several 
times the number unemployed in any month, those who suffer as a result of forced idleness can 
equal or exceed average annual unemployment, even though only a minority of the jobless in 
any month real ly suffer. For every person counted in the monthly unemployment tallies, there is 
another working part -time because of the inability to find full -time work, or else outside the 
labor force but wanting a job. Finally, income transfers in our country have al ways focused on 
the elderly, disabled, and dependent, neglecting the needs of the working poor, so that the 
dramatic expansion of cash and in -kind transfers does not necessarily mean that those failing in 
the labor market are adequately protected.  
As a res ult of such contradictory evidence, it is uncertain whether those suffering seriously 
as a result of labor market problems number in the hundreds of thousands or the tens of 
millions, and, hence, whether high levels of joblessness can be tolerated or must be countered 
by job creation and economic stimulus. There is only one area of agreement in this 
debate that the existing poverty, employment, and earnings statistics are inadequate for one 
their primary applications, measuring the consequences of labor mar ket problems.  
1. Which of the following is the principal topic of the passage?  
(A) What causes labor market pathologies that result in suffering  
(B) Why income measures are imprecise in measuring degrees of poverty  12 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) Which of the currently used statistic al procedures are the best for estimating 
the incidence of hardship that is due to unemployment  
(D) Where the areas of agreement are among poverty, employment, and earnings 
figures  
(E) How social statistics give an unclear picture of the degree of hards hip caused 
by low wages and insufficient employment opportunities  
2. The author uses labor market problems in lines 1 -2 to refer to which of the 
following?  
(A) The overall causes of poverty  
(B) Deficiencies in the training of th e work force  
(C) Trade relationships among producers of goods  
(D) Shortages of jobs providing adequate income  
(E) Strikes and inadequate supplies of labor  
3. The author contrasts the 1930s with the present in order to show that  
(A) more people were unemployed in the 1930s  
(B) unemployment now has less severe effects  
(C) social programs are more needed now  
(D) there now is a greater proportion of elderly and handicapped people among 
those in poverty  
(E) poverty has increased since the 1930s  
4. Which of the following proposals best responds to the issues raised by the 
author?  
(A) Innovative programs using m ultiple approaches should be set up to reduce the 
level of unemployment.  
(B) A compromise should be found between the positions of those who view 
joblessness as an evil greater than economic control and those who hold the 
opposite view.  
(C) New statistical  indices should be developed to measure the degree to which 
unemployment and inadequately paid employment cause suffering.  
(D) Consideration should be given to the ways in which statistics can act as 
partial causes of the phenomena that they purport to mea sure.  
(E) The labor force should be restructured so that it corresponds to the range of 
job vacancies.  
5. The authors purpose in citing those who are repeatedly unemployed during a 
twelve -month period is most probably to show that  
(A) there are several  factors that cause the payment of low wages to some 
members of the labor force  
(B) unemployment statistics can underestimate the hardship resulting from 
joblessness   GMAT  13 
 (C) recurrent inadequacies in the labor market can exist and can cause hardships 
for indiv idual workers  
(D) a majority of those who are jobless at any one time to not suffer severe 
hardship  
(E) there are fewer individuals who are without jobs at some time during a year 
than would be expected on the basis of monthly unemployment figures  
6. The author states that the mitigating effect of social programs involving income 
transfers on the inc ome level of low -income people is often not felt by  
(A) the employed poor  
(B) dependent children in single -earner families  
(C) workers who become disabled  
(D) retired workers  
(E) full -time workers who become unemployed  
7. According to the passage, one f actor that causes unemployment and earnings 
figures to overpredict the amount of economic hardship is the  
(A) recurrence of periods of unemployment for a group of low -wage workers  
(B) possibility that earnings may be received from more than one job per wor ker 
(C) fact that unemployment counts do not include those who work for low wages 
and remain poor  
(D) establishment of a system of record -keeping that makes it possible to compile 
poverty statistics  
(E) prevalence, among low -wage workers and the unemployed, of members of 
families in which others are employed  
8. The conclusion stated in lines 33 -39 about the number of people who suffer as a 
result of forced idleness depends primarily on the point t hat 
(A) in times of high unemployment, there are some people who do not remain 
unemployed for long  
(B) the capacity for self -support depends on receiving moderate -to-high wages  
(C) those in forced idleness include, besides the unemployed, both 
underemploye d part -time workers and those not actively seeking work  
(D) at different times during the year, different people are unemployed  
(E) many of those who are affected by unemployment are dependents of 
unemployed workers  
9. Which of the following, if true, is the best criticism of the authors argument 
concerning why poverty statistics cannot properly be used to show the effects of 
problems in the labor market?  
(A) A short -term increase in the number of those in poverty can indicate a 
shortage of jobs because the basic number of those unable to accept 
employment remains approximately constant.  14 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) For those who are in poverty as a re sult of joblessness, there are social 
programs available that provide a minimum standard of living.  
(C) Poverty statistics do not consistently agree with earnings statistics, when each 
is taken as a measure of hardship resulting from unemployment.  
(D) The elderly and handicapped categories include many who previously were 
employed in the labor market.  
(E) Since the labor market is global in nature, poor workers in one country are 
competing with poor workers in another with respect to the level of wages 
and the existence of jobs.