Virtually everything astronomers known about objects outside the solar system is based on 
the detection of photons quanta of electromagnetic radiation. Yet there is another form of 
radiation that permeates the universe : neutrinos. With (as its name implies) no electric charge, 
and negligible mass, the neutrino interacts with other particles so rarely that a neutrino can 
cross the entire universe, even traversing substantial aggregations of matter, without being 
absorbed  or even deflected. Neutrinos can thus escape from regions of space where light and 
other kinds of electromagnetic radiation are blocked by matter. Furthermore, neutrinos carry 
with them information about the site and circumstances of their production: the refore, the 
detection of cosmic neutrinos could provide new information about a wide variety of cosmic 
phenomena and about the history of the universe.  
But how can scientists detect a particle that interacts so infrequently with other matter? 
Twenty -five y ears passed between Paulis hypothesis that the neutrino existed and its actual 
detection: since then virtually all research with neutrinos has been with neutrinos created 
artificially in large particle accelerators and studied under neutrino microscopes. But a neutrino 
telescope, capable of detecting cosmic neutrinos, is difficult to construct. No apparatus can 20 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 detect neutrinos unless it is extremely massive, because great mass is synonymous with huge 
numbers of nucleons (neutrons and protons), and the mor e massive the detector, the greater 
the probability of one of its nucleons reacting with a neutrino. In addition, the apparatus must 
be sufficiently shielded from the interfering effects of other particles.  
Fortunately, a group of astrophysicists has prop osed a means of detecting cosmic 
neutrinos by harnessing the mass of the ocean. Named DUMAND, for Deep Underwater Muon  
and Neutrino Detector, the project calls for placing an array of light sensors at a depth of five 
kilometers under the ocean surface. The detecting medium is the seawater itself: when a 
neutrino interacts with a particle in an atom of seawater , the re sult is a cascade of electrically 
charged particles and a flash of light that can be detected by the sensors. The five kilometers of 
seawater above the sensors will shield them from the interfering effects of other high -energy 
particles raining down throug h the atmosphere.  
The strongest motivation for the DUMAND project is that it will exploit an important source 
of information about the universe. The extension of astronomy from visible light to radio waves 
to x-rays and gamma rays never failed to lead to t he discovery of unusual objects such as radio 
galaxies, quasars, and pulsars. Each of these discoveries came as a surprise. Neutrino 
astronomy will doubtless bring its own share of surprises.  
1. Which of the following titles best summarizes the passage as a whole?  
(A) At the Threshold of Neutrino Astronomy  
(B) Neutrinos and the History of the Universe  
(C) The Creation and Study of Neutrinos  
(D) The DUMAND System and How It Works  
(E) The Properties of the Neutrino  
2. With which of the following statements regarding neutrino astronomy would the 
author be most likely to agree?  
(A) Neutrino astronomy will supersede all present forms of astronomy.  
(B) Neutrino astronomy will be aba ndoned if the DUMAND project fails.  
(C) Neutrino astronomy can be expected to lead to major breakthroughs in 
astronomy.  
(D) Neutrino astronomy will disclose phenomena that will be more surprising 
than past discoveries.  
(E) Neutrino astronomy will always  be characterized by a large time lag between 
hypothesis and experimental confirmation.  
3. In the last paragraph, the author describes the development of astronomy in order 
to 
(A) suggest that the potential findings of neutrino astronomy can be seen as par t 
of a series of astronomical successes  
(B) illustrate the role of surprise in scientific discovery  
(C) demonstrate the effectiveness of the DUMAND apparatus in detecting 
neutrinos   GMAT  21 
 (D) name some cosmic phenomena that neutrino astronomy will illuminate  
(E) contrast the motivation of earlier astronomers with that of the astrophysicists 
working on the DUMAND project  
4. According to the passage, one advantage that neutrinos have for studies in 
astronomy is that they  
(A) have been detected for the last t wenty -five years  
(B) possess a variable electric charge  
(C) are usually extremely massive  
(D) carry information about their history with them  
(E) are very similar to other electromagnetic particles  
5. According to the passage, the primary use of the app aratus mentioned in lines 
24-32 would be to  
(A) increase the mass of a neutrino  
(B) interpret the information neutrinos carry with them  
(C) study the internal structure of a neutrino  
(D) see neutrinos in distant regions of space  
(E) detect the presence of cosmic neutrinos  
6. The passage states that interactions between neutrinos and other matter are  
(A) rare  
(B) artificial  
(C) undetectable  
(D) unpredictable  
(E) hazardous  
7. The passage mentions which of the following as a reason that neutrinos are har d 
to detect?  
(A) Their pervasiveness in the universe  
(B) Their ability to escape from different regions of space  
(C) Their inability to penetrate dense matter  
(D) The similarity of their structure to that of nucleons  
(E) The infrequency of their interac tion with other matter  
8. According to the passage, the interaction of a neutrino with other matter can 
produce  
(A) particles that are neutral and massive  
(B) a form of radiation that permeates the universe  
(C) inaccurate information about the site and cir cumstances of the neutrinos 
production  
(D) charged particles and light  22 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) a situation in which light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation are 
blocked  
9. According to the passage, one of the methods used to establish the properties of 
neutrinos was  
(A) detection of photons  
(B) observation of the interaction of neu trinos with gamma rays  
(C) observation of neutrinos that were artificially created  
(D) measurement of neutrinos that interacted with particles of seawater  
(E) experiments with electromagnetic radiation