During the nineteenth -century, occupational information about women that was provided 
by the United States census a population count  conducted each decade became more 
detailed and precise in response to social changes. Through 1840, simple enumeration by 
household mirrored a home -based agricultural economy and hierarchical social order: the head 
of the household (presumed male or absen t) was specified by name, whereas other household 
members were only indicated by the total number of persons counted in various categories, 
including occupational categories. Like farms, most enterprises were family -run, so that the 
census measured economi c activity as an attribute of the entire household, rather than of 
individuals.  
The 1850 census, partly responding to antislavery and womens rights movements, 
initiated the collection of specific information about each individual in a household. Not until  
1870 was occupational information analyzed by gender: the census superintendent reported 
1.8 million women employed outside the home in gainful and reputable occupations. In 
addition, he arbitrarily attributed to each family one woman keeping house. O verlap between 
the two groups was not calculated until 1890, when the rapid entry of women into the paid 
labor force and social issues arising from industrialization were causing womens advocates and 
women statisticians to press for more thorough and accu rate accounting of womens 
occupations and wages.  
236. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) explain and critique the methods used by early statisticians  
(B) compare and contrast a historical situation with a current -day one  
(C) describe and explain  a historical change  
(D) discuss historical opposition to an established institution  
(E) trace the origin of a contemporary controversy  
237. Each of the following aspects of nineteenth -century United States censuses is 
mentioned in the passage EXCEPT th e 
(A) year in which data on occupations began to be analyzed by gender  
(B) year in which specific information began to be collected on individuals in 
addition to the head of the household  
(C) year in which overlap between women employed outside the home an d 
women keeping house was first calculated  
(D) way in which the 1890 census measured womens income levels and 
educational backgrounds   GMAT  273 
 (E) way in which household members were counted in the 1840 census  
238. It can be inferred from the passage that the 1840 United States census provided a 
count of which of the following?  
(A) Women who worked exclusively in the home  
(B) People engaged i n nonfarming occupations  
(C) People engaged in social movements  
(D) Women engaged in family -run enterprises  
(E) Men engaged in agriculture  
239. The author uses the adjective simple in line 5 most probably to emphasize that 
the 
(A) collection of census  information became progressively more difficult 
throughout the nineteenth -century  
(B) technology for tabulating census information was rudimentary during the first 
half of the nineteenth century  
(C) home -based agricultural economy of the early nineteenth century was easier 
to analyze than the later industrial economy  
(D) economic role of women was better defined in the early nineteenth century 
than in the late nineteenth century  
(E) information collected by early -nineteen -century censuses was limited in its 
amount of detail  
240. The passage suggests which of the following about the womens advocates and 
women statisticians mentioned in lines 27 -28? 
(A) They wanted to call at tention to the lack of pay for women who worked in the 
home.  
(B) They believed that previous census information was inadequate and did not 
reflect certain economic changes in the United States.  
(C) They had begun to press for changes in census -taking metho ds as part of their 
participation in the antislavery movement.  
(D) They thought that census statistics about women would be more accurate if 
more women were employed as census officials.  
(E) They had conducted independent studies that disputed the official statistics 
provided by previous United States censuses.