It is an unfortunate fact that most North Americans know little about American Indian 
culture and history. Scholars have studied such matters, but they have not succeeded in 
broadcasting their conclusions widely. Thus, it is still not widely known that American Indians 
have epics, that they performed plays long before Europeans arrived, and that they practiced 
politics and carried on tra de. 
One way to gain a fuller appreciation of this rich culture is to examine American Indian 
poetry, for poetry is in all cultures the most central and articulate of the arts. It is especially 
important that we study American Indian poetry as this poetry c an create a context that gives 
cohesive expression to the crafts, the artifacts, and the isolated facts that many Americans have 
managed to notice willy-nilly. Even a survey of American Indian poetry reveals a range of poetic 
thought and technique that defies easy generalization. Jarold Ramsey hazards a summary, 
however, which serves at least to give the uninitiated reader some sense of what American 
Indian poetr y is like. Overall, he writes, it represents an oral, formulaic, traditional, and 
anonymous art form,  whose approach is to emphasize the mythic and sacred  components of 
reality. It flourished through public performances... by skilled recitalists whose  audiences 
already knew the individual stories  and valued the performers for their ability to exploit their 
material dramatically and to combine them their stories  in longer cycles  rather than for 
their plot invention.  Because this poetry belongs to  highly ethnocentric tribal peoples, whose 
cultures we still do not know much about,  it is likely to seem all the more terse, even cryptic.  
American Indian poetry has another feature that Ramsey ignores: it is always functional. 
Whether sung, chanted, or recited; whether performed ceremonially, as entertainment, or as 
part of a task such as curing a patient or grinding corn; or whether recited individually or by a 
group, it is always fully woven into the fabric of ordinary life.  
For complicated reasons,  American Indian poetry has basically been ignored by non -Indian 
cultures. Kenneth Lincoln writes that failure to hear American Indian voices results 
partly...from the tragedies of tribal dislocation, partly from mistranslation, partly from 
misconceptions  about literature, partly from cultural indifference.  Brian Swann suggests an 
additional explanation: tribal poetry is oral, whereas Europeans arrived in the New World with a 
deeply ingrained belief in the  primacy of the written word. As a result, Europea n settles found it 
hard to imagine that poetry could exist without written texts and thus that the American 
Indians had achieved something parallel to what Europeans called literature long before 
Europeans arrived. As a consequence, Europeans did not fully  respond to the rich vitality of 
American Indian poetry.  
1. According to the passage, American Indian cultures have produced all of the 
following forms of artistic expression EXCEPT  
(A) crafts  
(B) dramas  
(C) songs  216 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) written poems  
(E) oral epics  
2. According to Jarold Ramsey, American Indian poetry is an art form characterized 
by its  
(A) unusual depictions of landscapes  
(B) integration with everyday affairs  
(C) universal accessibility  
(D) highly original plots  
(E) adaptabilit y to public performance  
3. According to Kenneth Lincoln, one of the reasons that non -Indians have had little 
knowledge of American Indian poetry is that American Indian poems  
(A) have been poorly translated  
(B) have not yet attracted the scholarly attentio n they deserve  
(C) can be appreciated only when presented orally  
(D) are difficult to understand without a background in comparative mythology  
(E) are too stylistically complex  
4. According to the passage, it would be unusual for American Indian poetry to be  
(A) attributed to specific authors  
(B) sung by a group of performers  
(C) chanted while working  
(D) sung during a sacred ceremony  
(E) performed in a dramatic manner  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that Brian Swann believes which of the 
following about the European settlers of America?  
(A) They probably were more literate, on the average, than the general European 
population they l eft behind.  
(B) They probably thought it necessary to understand American Indian politics 
before studying American Indian literature.  
(C) They probably did not recognize evidence of an oral poetic tradition in the 
American Indian cultures they encountered.  
(D) They probably could not appreciate American Indian poetry because it  was 
composed in long narrative cycles.  
(E) They probably did not study American Indian poetry because its subject 
matter was too practically oriented.  
6. The tone of lines 12 -16 suggests that the author believes that most Americans  
knowledge of American Indian culture can best be characterized as  
(A) spotty and contradictory   GMAT  217 
 (B) stereotyped and limited  
(C) confused and inaccurate  
(D) unsystematic and superficial  
(E) vague and b iased  
7. Which of the following best describes the organization of the last paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) An observation is made and qualifications of it are provided.  
(B) A phenomenon is noted and explanations for it are presented.  
(C) A hypothesis is pre sented and arguments against it are cited.  
(D) A prognosis is made and evidence supporting it is discussed.  
(E) A criticism is presented and information expanding it is provided.  
 GMAT 15Passages