The majority of successful senior managers do not closely follow the classical rational 
model of first clarifying goals, assessing the problem, formulating opti ons, estimating 
likelihoods of success, making a decision, and only then taking action to implement the decision. 
Rather, in their day-by-day tactical maneuvers, these senior executives rely on what is vaguely 
termed intuition to manage a network of interrelated problems that require them to deal with 
ambiguity, inconsistency, novelty, and surprise; and to integrate action into the process o f 
thinking.  
Generations of writers on management have recognized that some practicing managers 
rely heavily on intuition. In general, however, such writers display a poor grasp of what intuition 
is. Some see it as the opposite of rationality ; others view it as an excuse for capriciousness.  
Isenbergs recent research on the c ognitive processes of senior managers reveals that 
managers intuition is neither of these. Rather, senior managers use intuition in at least five 
distinct ways. First, they intuitively sense when a problem exists. Second, managers rely on 
intuition to per form well -learned behavior patterns rapidly. This intuition is not arbitrary or 
irrational, but is based on years of painstaking practice and hands -on experience that build 
skills. A third function of intuition is to synthesize isolated bits of data and pr actice into an 
integrated picture, often in an Aha! experience. Fourth, some managers use intuition as a 
check on the results of more rational analysis. Most senior executives are familiar with the 
formal decision analysis models and tools, and those who  use such systematic methods for 
reaching decisions are occasionally leery of solutions suggested by these methods which run 
counter to  their sense of the correct course of action. Finally, managers can use intuition to 
bypass in -depth analysis and move rapidly to engender a plausible solution. Used in this way, 
intuition is an almost instantaneous cognitive process in which a ma nager recognizes familiar 
patterns. One of the implications of the intuitive style of executive management is that 
thinking is inseparable from acting. Since managers often know what is right before they 
can analyze and explain it, they frequently act first and explain later. Analysis is inextricably tied 
to action in thinking/acting cycles, in which managers develop thoughts about their companies 
and organizations not by analyzing a problematic situation and then acting, but by acting and 
analyzing in close concert.  
Given the great uncertainty of many of the management issues that they face, senior 
managers often instigate a course of action simply to learn more about an issue. They then use 
the results of the action to develop a more complete understan ding of the issue. One 
implication of thinking/acting cycles is that action is often part of defining the problem, not just  GMAT  35 
 of implementing the solution.  
1. According to the passage, senior managers use intuition in all of the following 
ways EXCEPT to  
(A) speed up of the creation of a solution to a problem  
(B) identify a problem  
(C) bring together disparate facts  
(D) stipulate clear goals  
(E) evaluate possible solutions to a problem  
2. The passage suggests which of the following about the writers on man agement 
mentioned in line 12 ? 
(A) They have criticized managers for not following the classical rational model 
of decision analysis.  
(B) They have not based their analyses on a sufficiently large sample of actual 
managers.  
(C) T hey have relied in drawing their conclusions on what managers say rather 
than on what managers do.  
(D) They have misunderstood how managers use intuition in making business 
decisions.  
(E) They have not acknowledged the role of intuition in managerial practice.  
3. Which of the following best exemplifies an Aha! experience ( line 28 ) as it is 
presented in the passage?  
(A) A manager risks taking an action whose outcome is unpredictable to discover 
whether the action changes the problem at hand.  
(B) A manager performs well -learned and familiar behavior patterns in creative 
and uncharacteristic ways to solve a problem.  
(C) A manager suddenly connects seemingl y unrelated facts and experiences to 
create a pattern relevant to the problem at hand.  
(D) A manager rapidly identifies the methodology used to compile data yielded 
by systematic analysis.  
(E) A manager swiftly decides which of several sets of tactics to implement in 
order to deal with the contingencies suggested by a problem.  
4. According to the passage, the classical model of decision analysis includes all of 
the following EXCEPT  
(A) e valuation of a problem  
(B) creation of possible solutions to a problem  
(C) establishment of clear goals to be reached by the decision  
(D) action undertaken in order to discover more information about a problem  
(E) comparison of the probable effects of d ifferent solutions to a problem  36 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 5. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following would most 
probably be one major difference in behavior between Manager X, who uses 
intuition to reach decisions, and Manager Y , who uses only formal decisio n 
analysis?  
(A) Manager X analyzes first and then acts; Manager Y does not.  
(B) Manager X checks possible solutions to a problem by systematic analysis; 
Manager Y does not . 
(C) Manager X takes action in order to arrive at the solution to a problem; 
Manager  Y does not.  
(D) Manager Y draws on years of hands -on experience in creating a solution to a 
problem; Manager X does not.  
(E) Manger Y depends on day -to-day tactical maneuvering; manager X does not.  
6. It can be inferred from the passage that thinking/ acting cycles ( line 45 ) in 
managerial practice would be likely to result in which of the following?  
I. A manager analyzes a network of problems and then acts on the basis of that 
analysis.  
II. A manager gathers data by acting an d observing the effects of action.  
III. A manager takes action without being able to articulate reasons for that 
particular action.  
(A) I only 
(B) II only 
(C) I and II only 
(D) II and III only 
(E) I, II, and III 
7. The passage provides support for which of the following statements?  
(A) Managers who rely on intuition are more successful than those who rely on 
formal decision analysis.  
(B) Managers cannot justify their intuitive decisions.  
(C) Managers intuition works contrary to their rational and analytical skills . 
(D) Logical analysis of a problem increases the number of possible solutions.  
(E) Intuition enables managers to employ their practical experience more 
efficiently.  
8. Which of the following best describes the organization of the first paragraph  of 
the passage?  
(A) An assertion is made and a specific supporting example is given.  
(B) A conventional model is dismissed and an alternative introduced.  
(C) Th e results of recent research are introduced and summarized . 
(D) Two opposing points of view are presented and evaluated.   GMAT  37 
 (E) A widely accepted definition is presented and qualified.