112 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Joseph Glatthaars Forged in Battle  is not the first excellent study of Black soldiers and their 
White officers in the Civil War, but it uses more soldier s letters and diaries including rare 
material from Black soldiers and concentrates more intensely on Black -White relations in Black 
regiments than do any of its predecessors. Glat thaars title expresses his thesis: loyalty, 
friendship, and respect among W hite officers and Black soldiers were fostered by the mutual 
dangers they faced in combat.  
Glatthaar accurately describes the governments discriminatory treatment of Black soldiers 
in pay, promotion, medical care, and job assignments, appropriately emphas izing the campaign 
by Black soldiers and their officers to get the opportunity to fight. That chance remained limited 
throughout the war by army policies that kept most Black units serving in rear -echelon 
assignments and working in labor battalions. Thus, while their combat death rate was only 
one-third that of White units, their mortality rate from disease, a major killer in his war, was 
twice as great.  Despite these obstacles, the courage and effectiveness of several Black units in 
combat won increasing r espect from initially skeptical or hostile White soldiers. As one White 
officer put it, they have fought their way into the respect of all the army.  
In trying to demonstrate the magnitude of this attitudinal change, however, Glatthaar 
seems to exaggerate  the prewar racism of the White men who became officers in Black 
regiments. Prior to the war, he writes of these men, virtually all of them held powerful racial 
prejudices. While perhaps true of those officers who joined Black units for promotion or ot her 
self-serving motives, this statement misrepresents the attitudes of the many abolitionists who 
became officers in Black regiments. Having spent years fighting against the race prejudice 
endemic in American society, they participated eagerly in this mil itary experiment, which they 
hoped would help African Americans achieve freedom and postwar civil equality. By current 
standards of racial egalitarianism, these mens paternalism toward African Americans was racist. 
But to call their feelings powerful rac ial prejudices is to indulge in generational chauvinism to 
judge past eras by present standards.  
1. The passage as a whole can best be characterized as which of the following?  
(A) An evaluation of a scholarly study  
(B) A description of an attitudinal chan ge 
(C) A discussion of an analytical defect  
(D) An analysis of the causes of a phenomenon  
(E) An argument in favor of revising a view  
2. According to the author, which of the following is true of Glatthaars Forged in 
Battle compared with previous studi es on the same topic?  
(A) It is more reliable and presents a more complete picture of the historical 
events on which it concentrates than do previous studies.  
(B) It uses more of a particular kind of source material and focuses more closely 
on a particular  aspect of the topic than do previous studies.  
(C) It contains some unsupported generalizations, but it rightly emphasizes a 
theme ignored by most previous studies.  
(D) It surpasses previous studies on the same topic in that it accurately describes  GMAT  113 
 conditi ons often neglected by those studies.  
(E) It makes skillful use of supporting evidence to illustrate a subtle trend that 
previous studies have failed to detect.  
3. The author implies that the title of Glat thaars book refers specifically to which of 
the following?  
(A) The sense of pride and accomplishment that Black soldiers increasingly felt 
as a result of their Civil War experiences  
(B) The civil equality that African Americans achieved after the Civil War, partly 
as a result of their use of organizati onal skills honed by combat  
(C) The changes in discriminatory army policies that were made as a direct result 
of the performance of Black combat units during the Civil War  
(D) The improved interracial relations that were formed by the races facing of 
comm on dangers and their waging of a common fight during the Civil War  
(E) The standards of racial egalitarianism that came to be adopted as a result of 
White Civil War veterans repudiation of the previous racism  
4. The passage mentions which of the follow ing as an important theme that receives 
special emphasis in Glatthaars book?  
(A) The attitudes of abolitionist officers in Black units  
(B) The struggle of Black units to get combat assignments  
(C) The consequences of the poor me dical care received by Black soldiers  
(D) The motives of officers serving in Black units  
(E) The discrimination that Black soldiers faced when trying for promotions  
5. The passage suggests that which of the following was true of Black units disease 
mortality rates in the Civil War?  
(A) They were almost as high as the combat mortality rate s of White units.  
(B) They resulted in part from the relative inexperience of these units when in 
combat.  
(C) They were especially high because of the nature of these units usual duty 
assignments.  
(D) They resulted in extremely high overall casualty rates  in Black combat units.  
(E) They exacerbated the morale problems that were caused by the armys 
discriminatory policies.  
6. The author of the passage quotes the White officer in lines 23 -24 primarily in 
order to provide evidence to support the conte ntion that  
(A) virtually all White officers initially had hostile attitudes toward Black soldiers  
(B) Black soldiers were often forced to defend themselves from physical attacks 
initiated by soldiers from White units  
(C) the combat performance of Black uni ts changed the attitudes of White 
soldiers toward Black soldiers  114 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) White units paid especially careful attention to the performance of Black 
units in battle  
(E) respect in the army as a whole was accorded only to those units, whether 
Black or White, that performed well in battle  
7. Which of the following best describes the kind of error attributed to Glatthaar in 
lines 25 -28? 
(A) Insisting on an unwarranted distinction between two groups of individuals in 
order to render an argument concerning them internally consistent  
(B) Supporting an argument in favor of a given interpretation of a situation with 
evidence that is not particula rly relevant to the situation  
(C) Presenting a distorted view of the motives of certain individuals in order to 
provide grounds for a negative evaluation of their actions  
(D) Describing the conditions prevailing before a given event in such a way that 
the contrast with those prevailing after the event appears more striking than 
it actually is  
(E) Asserting that a given event is caused by another event merely because the 
other event occurred before the given event occurred  
8. Which of the following action s can best be described as indulging in 
generational chauvinism ( lines 40 -41) as that practice is defined in the passage?  
(A) Condemning a present -day monarch merely because many monarchs have 
been tyrannical in the past.  
(B) C linging to the formal standards of politeness common in ones youth to such 
a degree that any relaxation of those standards is intolerable . 
(C) Questioning the accuracy of a report written by an employee merely because 
of the employees gender.  
(D) Deridin g the superstitions accepted as science in past eras without 
acknowledging the prevalence of irrational beliefs today.  
(E) Labeling a nineteenth -century politician as corrupt for engaging in 
once -acceptable practices considered intolerable today.