

The Food and Drug Administration has recently proposed severe restrictions on the use of 
antibiotics to promote the health and growth of meat animals. Medications added to feeds kill 
many microorganisms but a lso encourage the appearance of bacterial strains that are resistant 
to anti -infective drugs. Already, for example, penicillin and the tetracyclines are not as effective 
therapeutically as they once were. The drug resistance is chiefly conferred by tiny ci rclets of 
genes, called plasmids, that can be exchanged between different strains and even different 
species of bacteria. Plasmids are also one of the two kinds of vehicles (the other being viruses) 
that molecular biologists depend on when performing gene transplant experiments. Even 
present guidelines forbid the laboratory use of plasmids bearing genes for resistance to 
antibiotics. Yet, while congressional debate rages over whether or not to toughen these 
restrictions on scientists in their laboratories, little congressional attention has been focused on 
an ill-advised agricultural practice that produces known deleterious effects.  
17. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) discovering methods of eliminating harmful microorganisms withou t 
subsequently generating drug -resistant bacteria  
(B) explaining reasons for congressional inaction on the regulation of gene 
transplant experiments  
(C) describing a problematic agricultural practice and its serious genetic 
consequences  
(D) verifying the t herapeutic ineffectiveness of anti -infective drugs  
(E) evaluating recently proposed restrictions intended to promote the growth of 
meat animals  
18. According to the passage, the exchange of plasmids between different bacteria 
can results in which of the  following?  
(A) Microorganisms resistant to drugs  
(B) Therapeutically useful circlets of genes  
(C) Anti-infective drugs like penicillin  
(D) Viruses for use by molecular biologists  
(E) Vehicles for performing gene transplant experiments  
19. It can be inf erred from the passage that the author believes that those in favor of 
stiffening the restrictions on gene transplant research should logically also  
(A) encourage experiments with any plasmids except those bearing genes for 
antibiotic resistance  
(B) questi on the addition of anti -infective drugs to livestock feeds  
(C) resist the use of penicillin and tetracyclines to kill microorganisms  318 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) agree to the development of meatier livestock through the use of antibiotics  
(E) favor congressional debate and discussion of all science and health issues  
20. The authors attitude toward the development of bacterial strains that render 
antibiotic drugs ineffective can best be described as  
(A) indifferent  
(B) perplexed  
(C) pretentious  
(D) insincere  
(E) apprehensive  
During adolescence, the development of political ideology becomes apparent in the 
individual; ideology here is defined as the presence of roughly consistent attitudes, more or less  
organiz ed in reference to a more encompassing, though perhaps tacit, set of general principles. 
As such , political ideology is dim or absent at the beginning of adolescence. Its acquisition by 
the adolescent, in even the most modest sense,  requires the acquisition of relatively 
sophisticated cognitive skills: the ability to manage abstractness, t o synthesize and generalize, 
to imagine the future. These are accompanied by a steady advance in the ability to understand 
principles.  
The childs rapid acquisition of political knowledge also promotes the growth of political 
ideology during adolescence. By knowledge I mean more than the dreary facts, such as the 
composition of county government that the child is exposed to in the conventional nint h-grade 
civics course. Nor do I mean only information on current political realities. These are facets of 
knowledge, but they are less critical than the adolescents absorption, often unwitting, of a 
feeling for those many unspoken assumptions about the po litical system that comprise the 
common ground of understanding for example, what the state can appropriately demand of 
its citizens, and vice versa , or the proper relationship of government to subsidiary social 
institutions, such as the schools and churches. Thus political knowledge is the awareness of 
social assumptions and relationships as well as of objective facts. Much of the naivet  that 
characterizes the younger adolescents grasp of politics stems not from an ignorance of facts 
but from conventions of the system, of what is and is not customarily done, and of how and 
why it is or is not done.  
Yet I do not want to overemphasize the signi ficance of increased political knowledge in 
forming adolescent ideology. Over the years I have become progressively disenchanted about 
the centrality of such knowledge and have come to believe that much current work in political 
socialization, by relying t oo heavily on its apparent acquisition, has been misled about the 
tempo of political understanding in adolescence. Just as young children can count numbers in 
series without grasping the principle of ordination, young adolescents may have in their heads 
many random bits of political information without a secure understanding of those concepts 
that would give order and meaning to the information.  
Like magpies, childrens minds pick up bits and pieces  of data. If you encourage them, they 
will drop these at your feet Republicans and Democrats, the tripartite division of the federal 
system, perhaps even the capital of Massachusetts. But until the adolescent has grasped the 
integumental function that c oncepts and principles provide, the data remain fragmented,  GRE  319 
 random, disordered.  
21. The authors primary purpose in the passage is to  
(A) clarify the kinds of understanding an adolescent must have in order to 
develop a political ideology  
(B) dispute the th eory that a political ideology can be acquired during 
adolescence  
(C) explain why adolescents are generally uninterested in political arguments  
(D) suggest various means of encouraging adolescents to develop personal 
political ideologies  
(E) explain why an adolescents political ideology usually appears more 
sophisticated than it actually is  
22. According to the author, which of the following contributes to the development of 
political ideology during adolescence?  
(A) Conscious recogni tion by the adolescent of his or her own naivet   
(B) Thorough comprehension of the concept of ordination  
(C) Evaluation by the adolescent of the general principles encompassing his or 
her specific political ideas  
(D) Intuitive understanding of relationship s among various components of society  
(E) Rejection of abstract reasoning in favor of involvement with pragmatic 
situations  
23. The author uses the term common ground of understanding (line 27) to refer to  
(A) familiar legislation regarding political activity  
(B) the experiences that all  adolescents share  
(C) a societys general sense of its own political activity  
(D) a societys willingness to resolve political tensions  
(E) the assumption that the state controls social institutions  
24. The passage suggests that, during early adolescen ce, a child would find which of 
the following most difficult to understand?  
(A) A book chronicling the ways in which the presidential inauguration ceremony 
has changed over the years  
(B) An essay in which an incident in British history is used to explain t he system 
of monarchic succession  
(C) A summary of the respective responsibilities of the legislative, executive, and 
judicial branches of government  
(D) A debate in which the participants argue, respectively, that the federal 
government should or should n ot support private schools  
(E) An article detailing the specific religious groups that founded American 
colonies and the guiding principles of each one  320 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 25. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to agree 
with which of t he following statements about schools?  
(A) They should present political information according to carefully planned, 
schematic arrangements.  
(B) They themselves constitute part of a general sociopolitical system that 
adolescents are learning to understand.  
(C) If they were to introduce political subject matter in the primary grades, 
students would understand current political realities at an earlier age.  
(D) They are ineffectual to the degree that they disregard adolescents political 
naivet .  
(E) Because they are subsidiary to government their contribution to the political 
understanding of adolescent must be limited.  
26. Which of the following best summarizes the authors evaluation of the 
accumulation of political knowledge by adolescents?  
(A) It is unquestionably necessary, but its significance can easily be 
overestimated.  
(B) It is important, but not as important as is the ability to appear knowledgeable.  
(C) It delays the necessity of considering underlying principles.  
(D) It is primaril y relevant to an understanding of limited, local concerns, such as 
county politics.  
(E) It is primarily dependent on information gleaned from high school courses 
such as civics.  
27. Which of the following statements best describes the organization of the authors 
discussion of the role of political knowledge in the formation of politi cal ideology 
during adolescence?  
(A) He acknowledges its importance, but then modifies his initial assertion of that 
importance.  
(B) He consistently resists the idea that it is important, using a series of examples 
to support his stand.  
(C) He wavers in ev aluating it and finally uses analogies to explain why he is 
indecisive.  
(D) He begins by questioning conventional ideas about its importance, but finally 
concedes that they are correct.  
(E) He carefully refrains from making an initial judgment about it, but later 
confirms its critical role.  
No. 3 -2 
SECTION A   GRE  321 
 The making of classifications by literary historians can be a somewhat risky enterprise. 
When Black poets are discussed separate ly as a group, for instance, the extent to which their 
work reflects the development of poetry in general should not be forgotten, or a distortion of 
literary history may result. This caution is particularly relevant in an assessment of the 
differences bet ween Black poets at the turn of the century (1900 -1909) and those of the 
generation of the 1920s. These differences include the bolder and more forthright speech of 
the later generation and its technical inventiveness. It should be remembered, though, tha t 
comparable differences also existed for similar generations of White poets.  
When poets of the 1910s and 1920s are considered together, however, the distinctions 
that literary historians might make between conservative and experimental would be of l ittle 
significance in a discussion of Black poets, although these remain helpful classifications for 
White poets of these decades. Certainly differences can be noted between conservative Black 
poets such as Counter Cullen and Claude McKay and experiment al ones such as Jean Toomer 
and Langston Hughes. But Black poets were not battling over old or new styles; rather, one 
accomplished Black poet was ready to welcome another, whatever his or her style, for what 
mattered was racial pride.  
However, in the 192 0s Black poets did debate whether they should deal with specifically 
racial subjects. They asked whether they should only write about Black experience for a Black 
audience or whether such demands were restrictive. It may be said, though, that virtually al l 
these poets wrote their best poems when they spoke out of racial feeling, race being, as James 
Weldon Johnson rightly put it,  perforce  the thing the Negro poet knows best.  
At the turn of the century, by contrast, most Black poets ge nerally wrote in the 
conventional manner of the age and expressed noble, if vague, emotions in their poetry. These 
poets were not unusually gifted, though Roscoe Jamison and G.  M. McClellen may be 
mentioned as exceptions. They chose not to write in dialect , which, as Sterling Brown has 
suggested, meant a rejection of stereotypes of Negro life, and they refused to write only 
about racial subjects. This refusal had both a positive and a negative consequence. As Brown 
observes, Valuably insisting that Negro  poets should not be confined to issues of race, these 
poets committed [an] error they refused to look into their hearts and write. These are 
important insights, but one must stress that this refusal to look within was also typical of most 
White poets of  the United States at the time. They, too, often turned from their own experience 
and consequently produced not very memorable poems about vague topics, such as the peace 
of nature.  
17. According to the passage, most turn -of-the-century Black poets general ly did 
which of the following?  
(A) Wrote in ways that did not challenge accepted literary practice.  
(B) Described scenes from their own lives.  
(C) Aroused patriotic feelings by expressing devotion to the land.  
(D) Expressed complex feelings in the words of  ordinary people.  
(E) Interpreted the frustrations of Blacks to an audience of Whites.  
18. According to the passage, an issue facing Black poets in the 1920s was whether 
they should  322 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) seek a consensus on new techniques of poetry  
(B) write exclusively about and for Bl acks 
(C) withdraw their support from a repressive society  
(D) turn away from social questions to recollect the tranquility of nature  
(E) identify themselves with an international movement of Black writers  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that cla ssifying a poet as either conservative 
or experimental would be of little significance (line 21) when discussing Black 
poets of the 1910s and the 1920s because  
(A) these poets wrote in very similar styles  
(B) these poets all wrote about nature in the s ame way  
(C) these poets were fundamentally united by a sense of racial achievement 
despite differences in poetic style  
(D) such a method of classification would fail to take account of the influence of 
general poetic practice  
(E) such a method of classification would be relevant only in a discussion of 
poets separated in time by more than three decades  
20. The author quotes Sterling Brown in lines 53 -56 in order to  
(A) present an interpretation of some black poets that cont radicts the authors 
own assertion about their acceptance of various poetic styles  
(B) introduce a distinction between Black poets who used dialect and White poets 
who did not  
(C) disprove James Weldon Johnsons claim that race is what the Negro poet 
know s best  
(D) suggest what were the effects of some Black poets decision not to write only 
about racial subjects  
(E) prove that Black poets at the turn of the century wrote less conventionally 
than did their White counterparts  
21. It can be inferred from the passage that the author finds the work of the majority 
of the Black poets at the turn of the century to be  
(A) unexciting  
(B) calming  
(C) confusing  
(D) delightful  
(E) inspiring  
22. The author would be most likely to agree that poets tend to produce better poems 
when they  
(A) express a love of nature  
(B) declaim noble emotions   GRE  323 
 (C) avoid technical questions a bout style  
(D) emulate the best work of their predecessors  
(E) write from personal experience  
23. Which of the following best describes the attitude of the author toward 
classification as a technique in literary history?  
(A) Enthusiastic  
(B) Indifferent  
(C) Wary  
(D) Derisive  
(E) Defensive  
The primary method previously used by paleontologists to estimate climatic changes that 
occurred during Pleistocene glacial cycles was the determination of 18O/16O ratios in calcareous 
fossils. However, because this ratio is influenced by a number of factors, the absolute 
magnitude of the temperature difference between Pleistocene glacial and interglacial cycles 
could not be unequivocally ascertained. For example, both temperature fluctuations and 
isotopic changes in seawater affect the 18O/16O ratio. And, since both factors influence the ratio 
in the same direction, the contribution of each to the 18O/16O cannot be determined.  
Fortunately, recent studies indicate that the racemization reaction of amino acids can be 
used to determine more accurately temperatures that occurred during Pleistocene glacial cycles. 
Only L -amino acids are usually found in the proteins of living organisms, but over long periods 
of geological time these acids undergo racemization, producing D -amino acids, which are not 
found in proteins. This reaction depends on both time and temperature; thus, if one variable is 
known, the reaction can be used to calculate the other.  
24. It can be inferred from the passage that determination of the temperatures  
mentioned in line 17 through 18O/16O ratios and determination through 
racemization reactions both require which of the following?  
(A) Calcium deposits known to be from Pleistocene seas  
(B) Proteins containing both L -amino acids and D -amino acids  
(C) Glaci al debris from both before and after the Pleistocene period  
(D) Fossil material from organisms living during the Pleistocene period  
(E) Proteins containing both amino acids and 18O 
25. The passage suggests that the 18O/16O ratio could be used more successfully as a 
means of measurement if scientists were able to  
(A) determine the 18O/16O ratio in living animals as well as in fossil  remains  
(B) locate a greater number of calcareous fossils from the Pleistocene glacial and 
interglacial cycles  
(C) locate the factors other than temperature fluctuations and isotopic changes in 
seawater that affect the 18O/16O ratio  
(D) arrive at more exa ct determinations of which amino acids are found in the 324 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 proteins of living organisms  
(E) isolate the relative effects of temperature fluctuations and isotopic changes in 
seawater on 18O/16O ratios  
26. The information in the passage can be used to answer which of the following 
questions?  
I. Do temperature variations and isotopic changes  in seawater cause the 
18O/16O ratio to shift in the same direction?  
II. What are the methods used to determine the 18O/16O ratio?  
III. Is the study of racemization reactions useful in estimating climatic changes 
that occurred during Pleistocene glacial cy cles if only one of the two 
important variables is known?  
(A) I only  
(B) I and II only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
27. According to the passage, before the recent experiments described in the passage 
were completed, scientists could  
(A) determine temperatures only for Pleistocene seas  
(B) determine temperatures that occurred during Pleistocene gl acial cycles only 
by examining fossil remains  
(C) measure changes in temperatures that occurred during Pleistocene glacial 
cycles with only questionable accuracy  
(D) only partially identify factors tending to lower Pleistocene temperatures  
(E) accuratel y determine temperatures only for land masses affected by glaciation  
SECTION B 
Chimps and children, gulls and Greeks the ethologists go their merry way, comparing bits 
of human cultural behavior with bits of genetically programmed animal behavior. True, hu mans 
are animals; they share certain anatomical features with other animals, and some items of 
human behavior may seem analogous to the behavior of other animals. But such analogies can 
seriously mislead if we fail to look at the context of a particular it em of behavior. Thus one 
ethologist compares the presentation of a twig by a cormorant with gift -giving in humans. Yet 
the cormorants twig -presentation simply inhibits attack and is comparable to other 
appeasement rituals found in many species. Human gift -giving differs in form and purpose not 
only from culture to culture, but within the same culture in various social contexts. Everything 
significant about it derives from its social context. Thus, ethologists can accomplish 
littlebeyond reminding us that we are animals until they study humans as cultural beings.  
17. The author is primarily concerned with   GRE  325 
 (A) demonstrating the usefulness of ethology in discovering the behavioral limits 
within which humans operate  
(B) objecting to the degradation of humanity  implicit in the ethologists equation 
of humans and animals  
(C) pointing out the dangers inherent in comparing highly dissimilar species, such 
as humans and cormorants, rather than similar ones, such as humans and 
apes 
(D) refuting the idea that the appeas ement rituals in human cultural behavior can 
be profitably subjected to ethological analysis  
(E) arguing that the ethologists assumption that human behavior can be 
straightforwardly compared with animal behavior is invalid  
18. The author believes that gift-giving in humans  
(A) is instinctive behavior  
(B) is analogous to appeasement rituals in other animals  
(C) is not an appropriate subject of study for ethologists  
(D) must be considered within its social context to be properly understood  
(E) may be a  cultural remnant of behavior originally designed to inhibit attack  
19. The authors attitude toward contemporary ethologists can best be described as  
(A) puzzled  
(B) conciliatory  
(C) defensive  
(D) amused  
(E) disparaging  
20. Which of the following state ments from a report on a cross -cultural study of 
gift-giving would, if true, most strongly support the authors assertions 
concerning human gift -giving?  
(A) In every culture studied, it was found that some forms of gift -giving are acts 
of aggression that p lace the receiver under obligation to the giver.  
(B) Most governmental taxation systems differentiate between gifts of property 
given to children during a parents lifetime, and a childs inheritance of the 
same property from a parent dying without a will . 
(C) Some gift -giving customs have analogous forms in nearly every culture, as in 
the almost universal custom of welcoming strangers with gifts of food.  
(D) In North America, generally speaking, money is an acceptable holiday gift to 
ones letter carrier o r garbage collector, but is often considered an insult if 
given to ones employer, friends, or relatives.  
(E) Some gifts, being conciliatory in nature, indicate by their costliness the degree 
of hostility they must appease in the recipient.  
Few areas of neurobehavioral research seemed more promising in the early sixties than 326 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 that investigating the relation ship between protein synthesis and learning. The conceptual 
framework for this research was derived directly from molecular biology, which had shown that 
genetic information is stored in nucleic acids and expressed in proteins. Why not acquired 
information  as well?  
The first step toward establishing a connection between protein synthesis and learning 
seemed to be block memory (cause amnesia) by interrupting the production of protein. We 
were fortunate in finding a nonlethal dosage of puromycin that could, i t first appeared, 
thoroughly inhibit brain protein synthesis as well as reliably produce amnesia.  
Before the actual connection between protein synthesis and learning could be established, 
however, we began to have doubts about whether inhibition of protein  synthesis was in fact the 
method by which puromycin produced amnesia. First, other drugs, glutarimides themselves 
potent protein -synthesis inhibitors either failed to cause amnesia in some situations where it 
could easily be induced by puromycin or produc ed an amnesia with a different time course from 
that of puromycin. Second, puromycin was found to inhibit protein synthesis by breaking 
certain amino -acid chains, and the resulting fragments were suspected of being the actual 
cause of amnesia in some cases . Third, puromycin was reported to cause abnormalities in the 
brain, including seizures . Thus, not only were decreased protein synthesis and amnesia 
dissociated, but alternative mechanisms for the amnestic action of puromycin were readily 
suggested.  
So, puromycin turned out to be a disappointment. It came to be regar ded as a poor agent 
for amnesia studies, although, of course, it was poor only in the context of our original 
paradigm of protein -synthesis inhibition. In our frustration, our initial response was simply to 
change drugs rather than our conceptual orientati on. After many such disappointments, 
however, it now appears unlikely that we will make a firm connection between protein synthesis 
and learning merely by pursuing the approaches of the past. Our experience with drugs has 
shown that all the amnestic agents  often interfere with memory in ways that seem unrelated to 
their inhibition of protein synthesis. More importantly, the notion that the interruption or 
intensification of protein production in the brain can be related in cause -and-effect fashion to 
learni ng now seems simplistic and unproductive. Remove the battery from a car and the car will 
not go. Drive the car a long distance at high speed and the battery will become more highly 
charged. Neither of these facts proves that the battery powers the car; onl y a knowledge of the 
overall automotive system will reveal its mechanism of the locomotion and the role of the 
battery within that system.  
21. This passage was most likely excerpted from  
(A) a diary kept by a practicing neurobehavioral researcher  
(B) a new spaper article on recent advances in the biochemistry of learning  
(C) a technical article on experimental techniques in the field of molecular 
biology  
(D) an article summarizing a series of scientific investigations in neurobehavioral 
research  
(E) a book review in a leading journal devoted to genetic research  
22. The primary purpose of the passage is to show that extensive experimentation has   GRE  327 
 (A) demonstrated the importance of amino -acid fragmentation in the induction of 
amnesia  
(B) cast dou bt on the value of puromycin in the neurobehavioral investigation of 
learning  
(C) revealed the importance of amnesia in the neurobehavioral study of learning  
(D) not yet demonstrated the applicability of molecular biology to 
neurobehavioral research  
(E) not supported the hypothesis that learning is directly dependent on protein 
synthesis  
23. According to the passage, neurobehaviorists initially based their belief that 
protein synthesis was related to learning on which of the following ? 
(A) Traditional th eories about learning  
(B) New techniques in protein synthesis  
(C) Previous discoveries in molecular biology  
(D) Specific research into learning and amnesia  
(E) Historic experiments on the effects of puromycin  
24. The passage mentions all of the following as effects of puromycin EXCEPT:  
(A) brain seizures  
(B) memory loss  
(C) inhibition of protein synthesis  
(D) destruction of genetic information  
(E) fragmentation of amino -acid chains  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that, after puromycin was perceived to be a 
disappointment, researchers did which of the following?  
(A) They ceased to experiment with puromycin and shifted to other promising 
protein -synthesis inhibitors.  
(B) They ceased to experiment with puromycin, and reexamined through 
experiments the relationship between genetic information and acquired 
information.  
(C) The continued to experiment with puromycin, but applied their results to 
other facets of memory research.  
(D) They continued to experiment with puromycin, but also tried other 
protein -synthesis inhibitors . 
(E) They continued to experiment with puromycin until a new neuroanatomical 
framework was developed.  
26. In the example of the  car (lines 58 -65), the battery is meant to represent which of 
the following elements in the neurobehavioral research program?  
(A) Puromycin  328 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) Amnesia  
(C) Glutarimides  
(D) Protein synthesis  
(E) Acquired information  
27. Which of the following statement s could be most likely to come after the last 
sentence of the passage?  
(A) The failures of the past, however, must not impede further research into the 
amnestic action of protein -synthesis inhibitors.  
(B) It is a legacy of this research, therefore, that mo lecular biologys genetic 
models have led to disagreements among neurobehaviorists.  
(C) The ambivalent status of current research, however, should not deter 
neurobehaviorists from exploring the deeper connections between protein 
production and learning.  
(D) It is important in the future, therefore, for behavioral biochemists to 
emphasize more strongly the place of their specific findings within the 
overall protein -synthesis model of learning.  
(E) It is important in the future, therefore, for behavioral b iochemists to focus on 
the several components of the total learning system.  
No. 3 -3 
SECTION A  
Although pathogenic organisms constantly alight on the skin, they find it a very 
unfavorable environment and, in the absence of injury, have great difficulty colo nizing it. This 
self-sterilizing capacity of the skin results from the tendency of all well -developed ecosystems 
toward homeostasis, or the maintenance of the status quo.  
Species that typically live in soil, water, and elsewhere rarely multiply on the sk in. 
Undamaged skin is also unfavorable to most human pathogens. The skin is too acid and too arid 
for some species. The constant shedding of the surface skin layers further hinders the 
establishment of invaders. The most interesting defense mechanism, howe ver, results from the 
metabolic activities of the resident flora . Unsaturated fatty acids, an important component of 
the lipids in sebum collected from the skin surface, inhibit the growth of several bacterial and 
fungal cutaneous pathogens. These acids are a metabolic product of certain gram -positive 
members o f the cutaneous community, which break down the more complex lipids in freshly 
secreted sebum.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) offer an analysis of metabolic processes  
(B) detail the ways in which bacteria and fungi can be inhibited  
(C) describe mechanisms by which the skin protects itself against pathogens   GRE  329 
 (D) analyze the methods whereby biological systems maintain the status quo  
(E) provide a specific example of the skins basic defenses against pathogens  
18. The resident flora mentioned in line 16 refer to  
(A) Unsaturated fatty acids  (line 17)  
(B) sebum collected from the skin surface (lines 18 -19) 
(C) bacterial and fu ngal cutaneous pathogens (lines 19 -20) 
(D) certain gram -positive members of the cutaneous community (lines 21 -22) 
(E) more complex lipids (lines 23)  
19. Among the natural defenses of the skin against pathogenic organisms are all of 
the following EX CEPT the  
(A) dryness of the skin  
(B) acidity of the skin  
(C) tendency of the pathogens toward homeostasis  
(D) shedding of surface layers of the skin  
(E) metabolic breakdown of lipids  
20. The author presents her material in which of the following ways?  
(A) Stating a problem and then supplying a solution  
(B) Presenting a phenomenon and then analyzing reason for it  
(C) Providing information and then drawing a conclusion from it  
(D) Making a general statement and then arguing by analogy  
(E) Making an infe rence and then developing it by illustration  
Masterpieces are dumb, wrote Flaubert, They have a tranquil aspect like the very 
products of nature, like large animals and mountains. He might have been thinking of War and 
Peace, that vast, silent work, un fathomable and simple, provoking endless questions through 
the majesty of its being. Tolstois simplicity is  overpowering , says the critic Bayley, 
disconcerting,  because it comes from his casual assumption that the world is as he sees it. 
Like other nineteenth -century Russian writers he is impressive because he means what he 
says, but he stands apa rt from all others and from most Western writers in his identity with life, 
which is so complete as to make us forget he is an artist. He is the center of his work, but his 
egocentricity is of a special kind. Goethe, for example, says Bayley, cared for no thing but 
himself. Tolstoi was nothing but himself.  
For all his varied modes of writing and the multiplicity of characters in his fiction , Tolstoi 
and his work are of a piece . The famous conversion of his middle years, movingly recounted 
in his Confession, was a culmination of his early spiritual life, not a departure from it. The 
apparently fundamental changes that led from epic narrative to dogmatic parable, from  a 
joyous, buoyant attitude toward life to pessimism and cynicism, from War and Peace to The 
Kreutzer Sonata, came from the same restless, impressionable depths of an independent spirit 
yearning to get at the truth of its experience. Truth is my hero, wr ote Tolstoi in his youth, 
reporting the fighting in Sebastopol. Truth remained his hero his own, not others, truth. 330 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Others were awed by Napoleon, believed that a single man could change the destinies of 
nations, adhered to meaningless rituals, formed thei r tastes on established canons of art. 
Tolstoi reversed all preconceptions; and in every reversal he overthrew the system, the 
machine, the externally ordained belief, the conventional behavior in favor of unsystematic, 
impulsive life, of inward motiva tion and the solutions of independent thought.  
In his work the artificial and the genuine are always exhibited in dramatic opposition: the 
supposedly great Napoleon and the truly great, unregarded  little Captain Tushin, or Nicholas 
Rostovs actual experience in battle and his later account of it. The simple is always pitted 
against  the elaborate, knowledge gained from observation against assertions of borr owed 
faiths. Tolstois magical simplicity is a product of these tensions; his work is a record of the 
questions he put to himself and of the answers he found in his search. The greatest characters 
of his fiction exemplify this search, and their happiness d epends on the measure of their 
answers. Tolstoi wanted happiness, but only hard -won happiness, that emotional fulfillment 
and intellectual clarity which could come only as the prize of all -consuming effort. He scorned 
lesser satisfactions.  
21. Which of the  following best characterizes the authors attitude toward Tolstoi?  
(A) She deprecates the cynicism of his later works.  
(B) She finds his theatricality artificial.  
(C) She admires his wholehearted sincerity.  
(D) She thinks his inconsistency disturbing.  
(E) She respects his devotion to orthodoxy.  
22. Which of the following best paraphrases Flauberts statement quoted in lines 1 -4? 
(A) Masterpiece seem ordinary and unremarkable from the perspective of a later 
age. 
(B) Great works of art do not explain them selves to us any more than natural 
objects do.  
(C) Important works of art take their place in the pageant of history because of 
their uniqueness.  
(D) The most important aspects of good art are the orderliness and tranquility it 
reflects.  
(E) Masterpieces which are of enduring value represent the forces of nature.  
23. The author quotes from Bayley (line 8 -20) to show that  
(A) although Tolstoi observes and interprets life, he maintains no self -conscious 
distance from his experience  
(B) the realism of Tolstois work gives the illusion that his novels are reports of 
actual events  
(C) unfortunately, Tolstoi is unaware of his own limitation, though he is sincere in 
his attempt to describe experience  
(D) although Tolstoi works casually and mak es unwarranted assumption, his work 
has an inexplicable appearance of truth   GRE  331 
 (E) Tolstois personal perspective makes his work almost unintelligible to the 
majority of his readers  
24. The author states that Tolstois conversion represented  
(A) a radical renunciation of the world  
(B) the rejection of avant -garde ideas  
(C) the na tural outcome of his earlier beliefs  
(D) the acceptance of religion he had earlier rejected  
(E) a fundamental change in his writing style  
25. According to the passage, Tolstois response to the accepted intellectual and 
artistic values of his times was to 
(A) select the most valid from among them  
(B) combine opposing viewpoints into a new doctrine  
(C) reject the claims of religion in order to serve his art  
(D) subvert them in order to defend a new political viewpoint  
(E) upset them in order to be fait hful to his experience  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following is true of War and 
Peace ? 
(A) It belongs to an early period of Tolstois work.  
(B) It incorporates a polemic against the disorderliness of Russian life.  
(C) It has a  simple structural outline.  
(D) It is a work that reflects an ironic view of life.  
(E) It conforms to the standard of aesthetic refinement favored by Tolstois 
contemporaries.  
27. According to the passage, the explanation of Tolstois magical simplicity (line 
55) lies partly in his  
(A) remarkable power of observation and his facili ty in exact description  
(B) persistent disregard for conventional restraints together with his great energy  
(C) unusual ability to reduce the description of complex situations to a few words  
(D) abiding hatred of religious doctrine and preference for new s cientism  
(E) continuing attempt to represent the natural in opposition to the pretentious  
SECTION B 
The stratospheric ozone layer is not a completely uniform stratum, nor does it occur at the 
same altitude around the globe. It lies closest to the Earth over the  poles and rises to maximum 
altitude over the equator. In the stratosphere, ozone is continuously being made and destroyed 
by natural processes. During the day the Sun breaks down some of the oxygen molecules to 
single oxygen atoms, and these reacting with  the oxygen molecules that have not been 
dissociated, form ozone. However, the sunlight also breaks down ozone by converting some of 332 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 it back to normal oxygen. In addition naturally occurring nitrogen oxides enter into the cycle 
and speed the breakdown reac tions. The amount of ozone present at any one time is the 
balance between the processes that create it and those that destroy it.  
Since the splitting of the oxygen molecules depends directly upon the intensity of solar 
radiation, the greatest rate of ozone  production occurs over the tropics. However ozone is also 
destroyed most rapidly there, and wind circulation patterns carry the ozone -enriched upper 
layers of the atmosphere away from the equator. It turns out that the largest total ozone 
amounts are foun d at high latitudes. On a typical day the amount of ozone over Minnesota, for 
example , is 30 percent greater than the amount over Texas, 900 miles farther south. The 
density and altitude of the ozone layer also change with the seasons, the weather, and the  
amount of solar activity. Nevertheless, at any one place above the Earths surface, the 
long-term averages maintained by natural processes are believed to be reasonably constant.  
The amount of ozone near the Earth is only a small percent of the amount in the 
stratosphere, and exchange of molecules between the ozone layer and the air at ground level is 
thought to be relatively small. Furthermore, the ozone molecule is so unstable that only a tiny 
fraction of ground -level ozone could survive the long trip to  the stratosphere, so the ozone layer 
will not be replenished to any significant degree by the increasing concentrations of ozone that 
have been detected in recent years near the earths surface. The long -term averages of ozone 
both near ground level  and in the stratosphere are regulated by continuous processes that are 
constantly destroying and creating it in each of these places. This is why scientists are so 
concerned about human beings injection into the stratosphere of chemi cals like nitrogen oxides, 
which are catalysts that facilitate the breakdown of ozone. If the ozone layer is depleted 
significantly, more ultraviolet radiation would penetrate to the Earths surface and damage 
many living organisms.  
17. The passage suggest s that factors contributing to the variation in the amount of 
ozone above different areas of the Earths surface include which of the following?  
I. Some of the ozone found at higher latitudes was produced elsewhere . 
II. There is usually a smaller amount of  naturally occurring nitrogen oxide over 
high latitudes.  
III. The rate of ozone production over the poles is less than that over the tropics . 
(A) II only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) I and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
18. Which of the following bes t states the central idea of the passage?  
(A) Naturally occurring nitrogen oxides, as well as those introduced by humans, 
threaten to deplete the layer of ozone in the stratosphere.  
(B) A delicate but reasonably constant balance exists between the natural 
processes that produce and those that destroy ozone in the stratosphere.  
(C) There is little hope that the increased concentrations of ground -level ozone  GRE  333 
 observed in recent years can offset any future depletion of stratospheric 
ozone.  
(D) Meteorologically induced changes in the concentration of ozone in the 
stratosphere tend to cancel themselves out over a period of time.  
(E) Solar radiation not only produces and destroys zone but also poses a hazard to 
human life.  
19. The processes that determine the am ount of ozone in a given portion of the 
stratosphere most resemble which of the following?  
(A) Automobile emissions and seasonal fog that create a layer of smog over a city  
(B) Planting and harvesting activities that produce a crop whose size is always 
about the same  
(C) Withdrawals and deposits made in a bank account whose average balance 
remains about the same  
(D) Assets and liabilities that determine the net worth of a corporation  
(E) High grades and low grades made by a student whose average remains about 
the same from term to term  
20. According to the passage, which of the following has the LEAST effect on the 
amount of ozone at a given location in the upper atmosphere?  
(A) Latitude  
(B) Weather  
(C) Season  
(D) Ground -level ozone  
(E) Solar activity  
21. The author provides information that answers which of the following questions?  
I. What is the average thickness of the stratospheric ozone layer?  
II. Why does increased exposure  to ultraviolet radiation damage many living 
organisms?  
III. What is the role of oxygen in the production of stratospheric zone?  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) I and II  
(E) II and III  
22. In explaining what determines the amount of ozone in the  stratosphere, the author 
describes natural processes that form  
(A) an interactive relationship  
(B) a reductive system  
(C) a linear progression  334 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) a set of randomly occurring phenomena  
(E) a set of sporadically recurring events  
Feelings of hopelessness  among medieval workers trapped in the poverty cycle gradually 
lessened as it became possible for womens labor to supplement a familys money income by 
more than pennies. By 1300, women spinners could be found working on their own  for wealthy 
sponsors, even after the introduction in Italy and France of prohibition against advancing 
money for supplies to women spinners. Historians have usually interpreted this prohibition 
simply as evidence of womens economic subjection, s ince it obliged them to turn to usurers; 
however, it was also almost certainly a response to a trend toward differential reward for 
womens higher skill . Yarn can be spun irregularly and lumpily, but perfectly smooth yarn is 
worth more. Working for merchan t entrepreneurs on time rates, women had been paid hardly 
more than children; working as entrepreneurs themselves and producing good work by the 
piece, they could break into  the rational system of differential rewards.  
23. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) propose and defend a theory about the consequences of a certain historical 
event  
(B) present historical facts and offer a broader interpretation of those facts t han 
has been offered in the past  
(C) describe the socioeconomic effects of a widely held attitude during a 
particular historical period  
(D) demonstrate the superiority of using an economic approach to historical 
analysis  
(E) call attention to the influence of the textile industry on society during a 
particular historical period  
24. It can be inferred from the passage that the author views the system of paying all 
workers equally on time rates as  
(A) unfair and not rati onal 
(B) undesirable but unavoidable  
(C) efficient and profitable  
(D) advantageous to most women workers  
(E) evidence of a trend toward a more modern wage system  
25. The passage implies which of the following about women spinners in medieval 
Europe?  
(A) Most of them worked independently for wealthy sponsors.  
(B) They were not typical of medieval women entrepreneurs.  
(C) Some of them were paid for their work after it was done, according to its 
value.  
(D) They would have been able to contribute substantial  amounts to their families 
incomes were it not for the prohibition against advancing money to them.   GRE  335 
 (E) They were inevitably disadvantaged in the marketplace because they were 
obliged to obtain money for their supplies from usurers.  
26. The passage implies that feelings of hopelessness among medieval workers  
(A) resulted primarily from the lack of a rational system of differential rewards  
(B) disappeared completely once medieval textile workers were able to break the 
cycle of poverty  
(C) were more prevalent among female workers than among male workers  
(D) came into being in part because of womens lim ited earning capacity  
(E) were particularly common among textile workers in Italy and France  
27. The author suggests that historians have done which of the following?  
(A) Failed to give adequate consideration to the economic contribution of women 
during the medieval period.  
(B) Overestimated the degree of hopelessness experienced by medieval workers 
trapped in the poverty cycle.  
(C) Ignored the fact that by 1300 many women spinners were working 
independently rather than for merchant entrepreneurs.  
(D) Regard the economic sta tus of women in Italy and France as representative of 
womens status throughout medieval Europe.  
(E) Overlooked part of the significance of a prohibition governing one aspect of 
yarn production in medieval Europe.  
No. 4 -1 
SECTION A  
By the time the American colonists took up arms  against Great Britain in order to secure 
their independence, the inst itution of Black slavery was deeply  entrenched. But the 
contradiction inherent in this  situation was, for many, a source of constant embarrassment. It 
always appeared a most iniquitous scheme to me,  Abigail Adams wrote her husband in 1774, 
to fight ours elves for what we are daily robbing and plundering from those who have as  good 
a right to freedom as we have.  
Many Americans besides Abigail Adams were struck by the inconsistency of their stand 
during the  War of Independence, and they were not averse to making moves to emancipate the 
slaves. Quakers and other religious groups organized antislavery societies,  while numerous 
individuals manumitted their slaves. In fact, within several years of the end of the War of 
Independence, most of the Eastern states h ad made provisions for the gradual emancipation of 
slaves.  
17. Which of the following best states the central idea of the passage?  
(A) The War of Independence produced among many Black Americans a 
heightened consciousness of the inequities in American soci ety. 336 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) The War of Independence strengthened the bonds of slavery of many Black 
Americans while intensifying their desire to be  free. 
(C) The War of Independence exposed to many Americans the contradiction of 
slavery in  a country seeking its freedom and r esulted in efforts to resolve 
that contradiction.  
(D) The War of Independence provoked strong criticisms by many Americans of 
the institution of slavery, but produced little substantive action against it.  
(E) The War of Independence renewed the efforts of many American groups 
toward achieving Black emancipation.  
18. The passage contains information that would support which of the following 
statements about  the colonies before the War of Independence?  
(A) They contained organized antislavery societies.  
(B) They allowed individuals to own slaves.  
(C) They prohibited religious groups from political action.  
(D) They were inconsistent in their legal definitions of slave status.  
(E) They encouraged abolitio nist societies to expand their influence.  
19. According to the passage, the War of Independence was embarrassing to some 
Americans for  which of the following reasons?  
I. It involved a struggle for many of the same liberties that Americans were 
denying to o thers.  
II. It involved a struggle for independence from the very nation that had 
founded the colonies.  
III. It involved a struggle based on inconsistencies in the participants  
conceptions of freedom.  
(A) I only  
(B) II  only 
(C) I  and II only  
(D) I and III only 
(E) I, II, and III  
20. Which of the following statements regarding American society in the years 
immediately following the War of Independence is best supported by the 
passage?  
(A) The unexpected successes of the antislavery societies led to their gradual  
demise in the Eastern states.  
(B) Some of the newly independent American states had begun to make progress 
toward abolishing slavery.  
(C) Americans like Abigail Adams became disillusioned with the slow progress of 
emancipation and gradually abandon ed the cause.  
(D) Emancipated slaves gradually were accepted in the Eastern states as equal  GRE  337 
 members of American society.  
(E) The abolition of slavery in many Eastern states was the result of close 
cooperation between religious groups and free Blacks.  
The evolution of sex ratios has produced, in most plants and animals with separate sexes, 
approximately equal numbers of m ales and females. Why  should this be so? Two main kinds of 
answers have been offered. One is couched  in terms of advantage to population. It is argued 
that the sex ratio  will evolve  so as to maximize the number of meetings betwee n individuals of 
the opposite sex. This is essentially a group selection  argument. The other, and in my  view 
correct, type of answer was first put forward by  Fisher in 1930. This genetic  argument starts 
from the assumption t hat genes can influence the relative  numbers of male and female 
offspring produced by  an individual carrying the genes. That sex ratio will  be favored which 
maximizes the number of descendants an individual will have and hence the number  of gene 
copies tra nsmitted. Suppose that the population consisted mostly of females: then an individual  
who produced sons only would have more  grandchildren. In contrast, if the population 
consisted  mostly of males, it would pay to have daughters. If,  however, the population 
consisted of equal numbers  of males and females, sons and daughters would be  equally 
valuable. Thus a one -to-one sex ratio is  the only stable ratio; it is an evolutionarily stable  
strategy.  Although Fi sher wrote before the mathematical theory of games had been developed, 
his theory incorporates the essential feature of a game that the best strategy to adopt 
depends on what  others are doing.  
Since Fisher s time, it has been realized that genes  can someti mes influence the 
chromosome or gamete  in which they find themselves so that the gamete will  be more likely to 
participate in fertilization. If such a  gene occurs on a sex -determining (X or Y) chromosome, 
then highly aberrant sex ratios can occur. But  more immediately relevant to game theory  are 
the sex  ratios in certain parasitic wasp species that have a  large excess of females. In these 
species, fertilized eggs  develop into females and unfertilized eggs into males.  A female stores 
sperm and can determine the sex of  each egg she lays by fertilizing it or leaving it  unfertilized. 
By Fisher s argument, it should still pay a  female to produce equal numbers of sons and  
daughters. Hamilton, noting that the eggs develop  within their host the larva of another 
insect and that the newly emerged adult wasps mate immediately and disperse, offered a 
remarkably cogent analysis.  Since only one female usually lays eggs in a given  larva, it would 
pay her to produce one male only,  because this one mal e could fertilize all his sisters on  
emergence. Like Fisher, Hamilton looked for an  evolutionarily stable strategy, but he went a 
step further in recognizing  that he was looking for a  strategy.  
21. The author suggests that the work of Fisher and  Hamilton w as similar in that both 
scientists  
(A) conducted their research at approximately the same time  
(B) sought to manipulate the sex ratios of some of the animals they studied  
(C) sought an explanation of why certain sex ratios exist and remain stable  
(D) studi ed game theory, thereby providing important groundwork for the later 
development of strategy theory  
(E) studied reproduction in the same animal species  338 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 22. It can be inferred from the passage that the author considers Fishers work to be  
(A) fallacious and unprofessional  
(B) definitive and thorough  
(C) inaccurate but popular, compared with Hamiltons work  
(D) admirable, but not as up -to-date as Hamiltons work  
(E) accurate, but trivial compared with Hamiltons work  
23. The passage contains information  that would answer which of the following 
questions about wasps?  
I. How many eggs does the female wasp  usually lay in a single host larva?  
II. Can some species of wasp determine sex ratios among their offspring?  
III. What is the approximate sex ratio  among  the offspring of parasitic wasps?  
(A) I only 
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) I and II only  
(E) II and III only  
24. It can be inferred that the author discusses the genetic  theory in greater detail tha n 
the group selection theory primarily because he believes that the genetic theory is 
more  
(A) complicated  
(B) accurate  
(C) popular  
(D) compreh ensive  
(E) accessible  
25. According to the passage, successful game strategy depends on  
(A) the ability to adjust one s behavior in light of the behavior of others  
(B) one s awareness that there is safety in numbers  
(C) the degree of stability one can c reate in one s immediate environment  
(D) the accuracy with which one can predict future events  
(E) the success one achieves in conserving and storing one s resources  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that the mathematical theory of games has 
been  
(A) developed by scientist s with an interest in genetics  
(B) adopted by Hamilton in his research  
(C) helpful in explaining how genes can sometimes influence gametes  
(D) based on animals studies conducted prior to 1930  
(E) useful in explaining some biolo gical phenomena   GRE  339 
 27. Which of the following is NOT true of the species of parasitic wasps discussed in 
the passage?  
(A) Adult female wasps are capable of storing sperm.  
(B) Female wasps lay their eggs in the larvae of other insects.  
(C) The adult female was p can be fertilized by a male that was hatched in the 
same larva as herself.  
(D) So few male wasps are produced that extinction is almost certain.  
(E) Male wasps do not emerge from their hosts until they reach sexual maturity.  
SECTION B 
Thomas Hardys impulses as a writer, all of which he indulged in his novels, were numerous 
and divergent, and they did not always work together in harmony. Hardy was to some degree 
interested in exploring his characters psychologies, though impelled less by curiosity than by 
sympathy. Occasionally he felt the impulse to comedy (in all its detached coldness) as well as 
the impulse to farce, but he was more often in clined to see tragedy and record it. He was also 
inclined to literary realism in the several senses of that phrase. He wanted to describe ordinary 
human beings; he wanted to speculate on  their dilemmas rationally (and, unfortunately, even 
schematically); and he wanted to record precisely the material universe. Finally, he wanted to 
be more than a realist. He wanted to transcend what he considered to be the banality of solely 
record ing things exactly and to express as well his awareness of the occult and the strange.  
In his novels these various impulses were sacrificed to each other inevitably and often. 
Inevitably, because Hardy did not care in the way that novelists such as Flauber t or James cared, 
and therefore took paths of least resistance. Thus, one impulse often surrendered to a fresher 
one and, unfortunately, instead of exacting a compromise, simply disappeared. A desire to 
throw over reality a light that never was might give way abruptly to the desire on the part of  
what we might consider a novelist -scientist to record exactly and concretely the structure and 
texture of a flower. In this instance, the new impulse was at least an energetic one, and thus its 
indulgence did not result in a relaxed style. But on other occasions Hardy abandoned a perilous, 
risky, and highly energizing impulse in favor of what was for him the fatally relaxing impulse to 
classify and schematize abstra ctly. When a relaxing impulse was indulged, the style that sure 
index of an authors literary worth was certain to become verbose. Hardys weakness derived 
from his apparent inability to control the comings and goings of these divergent impulses and 
from h is unwillingness to cultivate and sustain the energetic and risky ones. He submitted to 
first one and then another, and the spirit blew where it listed; hence the unevenness of any one 
of his novels. His most controlled novel, Under the Greenwood Tree,  prominently exhibits two 
different but reconcilable impulses a desire to be a realist -historian and a desire to be a 
psychologist of love but the sl ight interlockings of plot are not enough to bind the two 
completely together. Thus even this book splits into two distinct parts.  
17. Which of the following is the most appropriate title for the passage, based on its 
content?  
(A) Under the Greenwood Tree : Hardys Ambiguous Triumph  340 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) The Real and the Strange: The Novelists Shifting Realms  
(C) Energy Versus Repose: The Role of: Ordinary People in Hardys Fiction  
(D) Hardys Novelistic Impulses: The Problem of Control  
(E) Divergent Impulses: The Issue of Unity in the Novel  
18. The passage suggests that the author would be most likely to agree with which of 
the following statements about literary realism?  
(A) Literary realism is most concerned with the exploration of  the internal lives 
of ordinary human beings.  
(B) The term literary realism is susceptible to more than a single definition.  
(C) Literary realism and an interest in psychology are likely to be at odds in a 
novelists work.  
(D) Literary realism is the t erm most often used by critics in describing the 
method of Hardys novels.  
(E) A propensity toward literary realism is a less interesting novelistic impulse 
than is an interest in the occult and the strange.  
19. The author of the passage considers a writers style to be  
(A) a reliable means by which to measure the writers li terary merit  
(B) most apparent in those parts of the writers work that are not realistic  
(C) problematic when the writer attempts to follow perilous or risky impulses  
(D) shaped primarily by the writers desire to classify and schematize  
(E) the most a ccurate index of the writers literary reputation  
20. Which of the following words could best be substituted for relaxed (line 37) 
without substantially changing the authors meaning?  
(A) informal  
(B) confined  
(C) risky  
(D) wordy  
(E) metaphoric  
21. The passage supplies information to suggest that its author would be most likely 
to agree with which of the following statements about the novelists Flaubert and 
James?  
(A) They indulged more impulses in their novels than did Hardy in his novels.  
(B) They ha ve elicited a greater degree of favorable response from most literary 
critics than has Hardy.  
(C) In the writing of their novels, they often took pains to effect a compromise 
among their various novelistic impulses.  
(D) Regarding novelistic construction, t hey cared more about the opinions of 
other novelists than about the opinions of ordinary readers.   GRE  341 
 (E) They wrote novels in which the impulse toward realism and the impulse away 
from realism were evident in equal measure.  
22. Which of the following state ments best describes the organization of lines 27 to 
41 of the passage (Thusabstractly)?  
(A) The author makes a disapproving observation and then presents two cases, 
one of which leads to a qualification of his disapproval and the other of 
which does no t. 
(B) The author draws a conclusion from a previous statement, explains his 
conclusion in detail, and then gives a series of examples that have the effect 
of resolving an inconsistency.  
(C) The author concedes a point and then makes a counterargument, usi ng an 
extended comparison and contrast that qualifies his original concession.  
(D) The author makes a judgment, points out an exception to his judgment, and 
then contradicts his original assertion.  
(E) The author summarizes and explains an argument and then advances a brief 
history of opposing arguments.  
23. Which of the following statements about the use of comedy in Hardys novels is 
best supported by the passage?  
(A) Hardys use of comedy in his novels tended to weaken his literary style.  
(B) Hardys use of comedy in his novels was inspired by his natural sympathy.  
(C) Comedy appeared less frequently in Hardys novels than did tragedy.  
(D) Comedy played an important role in Hardys novels though that comedy was 
usually in the form of farce.  
(E) Comedy played a secondary role in Hardys more controlled novels only.  
24. The author implies which of the following about Under the Greenwood Tree  in 
relation to Hardys other novels?  
(A) It is Hardys most thorough investigation of the psychology  of love.  
(B) Although it is his most controlled novel, it does not exhibit any harsh or risky 
impulses.  
(C) It, more than his other novels, reveals Hardy as a realist interested in the 
history of ordinary human beings.  
(D) In it Hardys novelistic impulse s are managed somewhat better than in his 
other novels.  
(E) Its plot, like the plots of all of Hardys other novels, splits into two distinct 
parts.  
Upwards of a billion stars in our galaxy have burnt up their internal energy sources, and so 
can no longer produce the heat a star needs to oppose the inward f orce of gravity. These stars, 
of more than a few solar masses, evolve, in general, much more rapidly than does a star like the 
Sun. Moreover, it is just these more massive stars whose collapse does not halt at intermediate 
stages (that is, as white dwarfs or neutron stars). Instead, the collapse continues until a 342 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 singularity (an infinitely dense concentration of matter) is reached.  
It would be wonderful to observe a singularity and obtain direct evidence of the 
undoubtedly bizarre phenomena that occur near one. Unfortunately in most cases a distant 
observer cannot see the singularity; outgoing light rays are dragged back by gravity so 
forcefully that even if they could start out  within a few kilometers of the singularity, they would 
end up in the singularity itself.  
25. The authors primary purpose in the passage is to  
(A) describe the formation and nature of singularities  
(B) explain why large numbers of stars become singularities  
(C) compare the characteristics of  singularities with those of stars  
(D) explain what happens during the stages of a singularitys formation  
(E) imply that singularities could be more easily studied if observers could get 
closer to them  
26. The passage suggests which of the following ab out the Sun?  
I. The Sun could evolve to a stage of collapse that is less dense than a 
singularity.  
II. In the Sun, the inward force of gravity is balanced by the generation of heat.  
III. The Sun emits more observable light than does a white dwarf or a neut ron 
star. 
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
27. Which of the following sentences would most probably follow the last sentence 
of the passage?  
(A) Thus, a physicist interested in studying phenomena near singularities would 
necessarily hope to find a singularity with a measurabl e gravitational field.  
(B) Accordingly, physicists to date have been unable to observe directly any 
singularity.  
(C) It is specifically this startling phenomenon that has allowed us to codify the 
scant information currently available about singularities.  
(D) Moreover, the existence of this extraordinary phenomenon is implied in the 
extensive reports of several physicists.  
(E) Although unanticipated, phenomena such as these are consistent with the 
structure of a singularity.  
No. 4 -2  GRE  343 
 SECTION A  
The evolution of intelligence among early  large mammals of the grasslands was due in  
great measure to the interaction between two  ecologically synchronized groups of these 
animals, the hunting carnivores and the herbivores  that they hunted. The interaction resulting 
from the differences between predator and prey led to  a general improvement in brain 
functions;  however, certain compon ents of intelligence were  improved far more than others.  
The kind of intelligence favored by the  interplay of increasingly smarter catchers and  
increasingly keener escapers is defined by  attention that aspect of mind carrying  
consciou sness forward from one  moment to the  next. It ranges from a passive, free -floating  
awareness to a highly focused, active fixation.  The range through these states is mediated by  
the arousal system, a network of tracts converging from sensory systems to integrating centers  
in the  brain stem. From the more relaxed to the  more vigorous levels, sensitivity to novelty is  
increased. The organism is more awake, more  vigilant; this increased vigilance results in the  
apprehension of ever more subtle signals as the  organism becomes more se nsitive to  its 
surroundings. The processes of arousal and  concentration give attention its direction. Arousal is 
at first general, with a flooding of impulses in the  brain stem; then gradually the activation is  
channeled. Thus begins concentration, the hol ding of consistent images. One meaning of  
intelligence is the way in which these images and other  alertly searched information are used in 
the context of previous experience. Consciousness links  past attention to the present and 
permits the  integration of details with perceived ends and  purposes.  
The elements of intelligence and consciousness come together marvelously to produce 
different styles in predator and prey. Herbivores  and carnivores develop different kinds of 
attention related to escaping or chasi ng. Although in  both kinds of animal, arousal stimulates 
the production of adrenaline and norepinephrine by  the adrenal glands, the effect in herbivores 
is primarily fear, whereas in carnivores the effect is  primarily aggression. For both, arousal 
attunes  the animal to what is ahead. Perhaps it does not  experience forethought as we know it, 
but the  animal does experience something like it. The  predator is searchingly aggressive, 
innerdirected,  tuned by the nervous system and the adrenal  hormones, but aware in a sense 
closer to human  consciousness than, say, a hungry lizard s instinctive snap at a passing beetle. 
Using past events  as a framework, the large mammal predator is  working out a relationship 
between movement  and food, sensitive to possibilities in c old trails  and distant sounds and 
yesterday s unforgotten  lessons. The herbivore prey is of a different  mind. Its mood of wariness 
rather than searching  and its attitude of general expectancy instead of  anticipating are silk -thin 
veils of tranquility over  an explosive endocrine system.  
17. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) disproving the view that herbivores are less intelligent than carnivores  
(B) describing a relationship between animals  intelligence and their ecological 
roles  
(C) establishing a  direct link between early  large mammals and their modern 
counterparts  
(D) analyzing the ecological basis for the dominance of some carnivores over 344 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 other carnivores  
(E) demonstrating the importance of hormones in mental activity  
18. The author refers to  a hungry lizard (line 55) primarily in order to  
(A) demonstrate the similarity between the hunting methods of mammals and 
those  of nonmammals  
(B) broaden the application of his argument by including an insectivore as an 
example  
(C) make a distinction betw een higher and lower levels of consciousness  
(D) provide an additional illustration of the brutality characteristic of predators  
(E) offer an objection to suggestions that all animals lack consciousness  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that in animals less intelligent than the 
mammals discussed in the passage  
(A) past experience is less helpful in ensuring survival  
(B) at tention is more highly focused  
(C) muscular coordination is less highly developed  
(D) there is less need for competition among species  
(E) environment is more important in establishing the proper ratio of prey to  
predator  
20. The sensitivity described i n lines 56 -61 is  most  clearly an example of  
(A) free-floating awareness  (lines 16 -17) 
(B) flooding of impulses in the brain stem  (lines 29 -30) 
(C) the holding of consistent images  (lines 31 -32) 
(D) integration of details with perceived ends and purp oses (lines 37 -38) 
(E) silk-thin veils of tranquility  (line 64)  
21. The author s attitude toward the mammals discussed in the passage is best 
described as  
(A) superior and condescending  
(B) lighthearted and jocular  
(C) apologetic and conciliatory  
(D) wistful and tender  
(E) respectful and admiring  
22. The author provides information that would answer which of the following 
questions?  
I. Why is an aroused herbivore usually fearful?  
II. What are some of the degrees of attention in large mammals?  
III. What occurs when th e stimulus that causes arousal of a mammal is 
removed?   GRE  345 
 (A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II and III  
23. According to the passage, improvement in  brain function among early large 
mammals resulted primarily from which of  the following?  
(A) Interplay of predator and prey  
(B) Persistence of free -floating awareness in animals of the grasslands  
(C) Gradual dominance of warm -blooded  mam mals over cold -blooded reptiles  
(D) Interaction of early large mammals with  less intelligent  species  
(E) Improvement of the capacity for memory among herbivores and carnivores  
24. According to the passage, as the process of arousal in an organism continues, all 
of the following may occur EXCEPT:  
(A) the production of adrenaline  
(B) the production of n orepinephrine  
(C) a heightening of sensitivity to stimuli  
(D) an increase in selectivity with respect to stimuli  
(E) an expansion of the range of states mediated by the brain stem  
Tocqueville, apparently, was wrong.  Jacksonian  America was not a fluid, e galitarian society 
where  individual wealth and poverty were  ephemeral  conditions. At least so argues E. Pessen in 
his iconoclastic  study of the very rich in the United States between  1825 and 1850.  
Pessen does present a quantity of  exam ples, together with some refreshingly intelligible 
statistics,  to establish the existence of an inordinately wealthy  class. Though active in 
commerce or the professions,  most of the wealthy were not self -made, but had inherited family 
fortunes. In no sense  mercurial, these  great fortunes survived the financial panics that 
destroyed lesser ones. Indeed, in several cities the  wealthiest one percent constantly increased 
its share  until by 1850 it owned half of the community s wealth.  Although these  observation s 
are true, Pessen  overestimates their importance by concluding from them  that the undoubted 
progress toward inequality in the  late eighteenth century continued in the Jacksonian  period 
and that the United States was a class -ridden,  plutocratic society eve n before industrialization.  
25. According to the passage, Pessen indicates that all of the following were true of 
the very wealthy  in the United States between 1825 and 1850 EXCEPT:  
(A) They formed a distinct upper class.  
(B) Many of them were able to incr ease their holdings.  
(C) Some of them worked as professionals or in business.  
(D) Most of them accumulated their own fortunes.  
(E) Many of them retained their wealth in spite of financial upheavals.  346 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 26. The authors attitude toward Pessens presentation  of statistics can be best 
described as  
(A) disapproving  
(B) shocked  
(C) suspicious  
(D) amused  
(E) laudatory  
27. Which of the following best states the authors main point?  
(A) Pessens study has overturned the previously established view of the social 
and economic structure of early nineteenth -century America.  
(B) Tocquevilles analysis of the United States in the Jacksonian era remains the 
definitive account of this period.  
(C) Pessens study is valuable primarily because it shows the continuity of the  
social system in the United States throughout the nineteenth century.  
(D) The social patterns and political power of the extremely wealthy in the United 
States between 1825 and 1850 are well documented.  
(E) Pessen challenges a view of the social and economic system in the United 
States from 1825 to 1850, but he draws conclusions that are incorrect.  
SECTION B 
I want to criticize the social system, and to show it at work, at its most intense. Virginia  
Woolfs provocative statement about her intentions in writing Mrs. Dalloway  has regularly been 
ignored by the critics, since it highlights an aspect of her literary interests very different from 
the traditional picture of the poetic novelist concerned w ith examining states of reverie and 
vision and with following the intricate pathways of individual consciousness. But Virginia Woolf 
was a realistic as well as a poetic novelist, a satirist and social critic as well as a visionary: 
literary critics cavali er dismissal of Woolfs social vision will not withstand scrutiny.  
In her novels, Woolf is deeply engaged by the questions of how individuals are shaped (or 
deformed) by their social environments, how historical forces impinge on  peoples lives, how 
class, wealth, and gender help to determine peoples fates. Most of her novels are rooted in a 
realistically rendered social setting and in a precise historical time.  
Woolfs focus on society has not been generally recognized because  of her intense 
antipathy to propaganda in art. The pictures of reformers in her novels are usually satiric or 
sharply critical. Even when Woolf is fundamentally sympathetic to their causes, she portrays 
people anxious to reform their society and possessed  of a message or program as arrogant or 
dishonest, unaware of how their political ideas serve their own psychological needs. ( Her 
Writers Diary notes: the only honest people are the artists, whereas these social reformers 
and philanthropistsharbordis creditable desires under the disguise of loving their kind) 
Woolf detested what she called preaching in fiction, too, and criticized novelist D. H. Lawrence 
(among others) for working by this method.   GRE  347 
 Woolfs own social criticism is expressed in the lan guage of observation rather than in 
direct commentary, since for her, fiction is a contemplative, not an active art. She describes 
phenomena and provides materials for a judgment about society and social issues; it is the 
readers work to put the observati ons together and understand the coherent point of view 
behind them. As a moralist, Woolf works by indirection, subtly undermining officially accepted 
mores, mocking, suggesting, calling into question, rather than asserting, advocating, bearing 
witness: her s is the satirists art.  
Woolfs literary models were acute social observers like Chekhov and Chaucer. As she put it 
in The Common Reader,  It is safe to say that not a single law has been framed or one stone set 
upon another because of anything Chaucer sa id or wrote; and yet, as we read him, we are 
absorbing morality at every pore. Like Chaucer, Woolf chose to understand as well as to judge, 
to know her society root and branch a decision crucial in order to produce art rather than 
polemic.  
17. Which of th e following would be the most appropriate title for the passage?  
(A) Poetry and Satire as Influences on the Novels of Virginia Woolf  
(B) Virginia Woolf: Critic and Commentator on the Twentieth -Century Novel  
(C) Trends in Contemporary Reform Movements as a Key to Understanding 
Virginia Woolfs Novels  
(D) Society as Allegory for the Individual in the Novels of Virginia Woolf  
(E) Virginia Woolfs Novels: Critical Reflections on the Individual and on Society  
18. In the first paragraph of the passage, the aut hors attitude toward the literary 
critics mentioned can best be described as  
(A) disparaging  
(B) ironic  
(C) facetious  
(D) skeptical but resigned  
(E) disappointed but hopeful  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that Woolf chose Chaucer as a literary model 
because she believed that  
(A) Chaucer was the first English author to focus on society as a whole as well as 
on individual characters  
(B) Chaucer was an honest and forthright author, whereas novelists like D, H, 
Lawrence d id not sincerely wish to change society  
(C) Chaucer was more concerned with understanding his society than with calling 
its accepted mores into question  
(D) Chaucers writing was greatly, if subtly, effective in influencing the moral 
attitudes of his reade rs 
(E) her own novels would be more widely read if, like Chaucer, she did not 
overtly and vehemently criticize contemporary society  348 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 20. It can be inferred from the passage that the most probable reason Woolf 
realistically described the social setting in  the majority of her novels was that she  
(A) was aware that contemporary literary critics considered the novel to be the 
most realistic of literary genres  
(B) was interested in the effect of a persons social milieu on his or her character 
and actions  
(C) needed to be as attentive to detail as possible in her novels in order to support 
the arguments she advanced in them  
(D) wanted to show that a painstaking fidelity in the representation of reality did 
not in any way hamper the artist  
(E) wished to prevent critics from charging that her novels were written in an 
ambiguous and inexact style  
21. Which of the following phrases best expresses the sense of the word 
contemplative as it is used in lines 43 -44 of the passage?  
(A) Graduall y elucidating the rational structures underlying accepted mores  
(B) Reflecting on issues in society without prejudice or emotional commitment  
(C) Avoiding the aggressive assertion of the authors perspective to the exclusion 
of the readers judgment  
(D) Co nveying a broad view of society as a whole rather than focusing on an 
isolated individual consciousness  
(E) Appreciating the world as the artist sees it rather than judging it in moral 
terms  
22. The author implies that a major element of the satirists art is the satirists  
(A) consistent adherence to a position of lofty disdain when viewing the foibles 
of humanity  
(B) insistence on the helplessness of individuals against the social forces that seek 
to determine an individuals fate  
(C) cynical disbelief that visionaries can either enlighten or improve their 
societies  
(D) fundamental assumption that some ambiguity must remain in a work of art in 
order for it to reflect society and social mores accurately  
(E) refusal to indulge in polemic when presenting social mores to readers for their 
scrutiny  
23. The passage supplies information for answering which of the following 
questions?  
(A) Have literary critics ignored the social criticism inherent in the wor ks of 
Chekhov and Chaucer?  
(B) Does the author believe that Woolf is solely an introspective and visionary 
novelist?   GRE  349 
 (C) What are the social causes with which Woolf shows herself to be sympathetic 
in her writings?  
(D) Was D. H. Lawrence as concerned as Woo lf was with creating realistic 
settings for his novels?  
(E) Does Woolf attribute more power to social environment or to historical forces 
as shapers of a persons life?  
It is a popular misconception that nuclear fusion power is free of radioactivity; in fact, the 
deuterium -tritium reaction that nuclear scie ntists are currently exploring with such zeal 
produces both alpha particles and neutrons. (The neutrons are used to produce tritium from a 
lithium blanket surrounding the reactor.) Another common misconception is that nuclear fusion 
power is a virtually un limited source of energy because of the enormous quantity of deuterium 
in the sea. Actually, its limits are set by the amount of available lithium, which is about as 
plentiful as uranium in the Earths crust. Research should certainly continue on controlle d 
nuclear fusion, but no energy program should be premised on its existence until it has proven 
practical. For the immediate future, we must continue to use hydroelectric power, nuclear 
fission, and fossil fuels to meet our energy needs. The energy sources  already in major use are 
in major use for good reason.  
24. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) criticize scientists who believe that the deuterium -tritium fusion reaction can 
be made feasible as an energy source  
(B) admonish scientists who have f ailed to correctly calculate the amount of 
lithium available for use in nuclear fusion reactors  
(C) defend the continued short -term use of fossil fuels as a major energy source  
(D) caution against uncritical embrace of nuclear fusion power as a major energ y 
source  
(E) correct the misconception that nuclear fusion power is entirely free of 
radioactivity  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the author believes which of the following 
about the current state of public awareness concerning nuclear fusion powe r? 
(A) The public has been deliberately misinformed about the advantages and 
disadvantages of nuclear fusion power.  
(B) The public is unaware of the principal advantage of nuclear fusion over 
nuclear fission as an energy source.  
(C) The publics awareness of the scientific facts concerning nuclear fusion 
power is somewhat distorted and incomplete.  
(D) The public is not interested in increasing its awareness of the advantages and 
disadvantages of nuclear fusion power.  
(E) The public is aware of the disadvantages of nuclear fusion power but not of 
its advantages.  
26. The passage provides information that would answer which of the following 350 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 questions?  
(A) What is likely to be the principal source of deuterium for nucl ear fusion 
power?  
(B) How much incidental radiation is produced in the deuterium tritium fusion 
reaction?  
(C) Why are scientists exploring the deuterium -tritium fusion reaction with such 
zeal?  
(D) Why must the tritium for nuclear fusion be synthesized from  lithium?  
(E) Why does the deuterium -tritium reaction yield both alpha particles and 
neutrons?  
27. Which of the following statements concerning nuclear scientists is most directly 
suggested in the passage?  
(A) Nuclear scientists are not themselves aware of all o f the facts surrounding the 
deuterium -tritium fusion reaction.  
(B) Nuclear scientists exploring the deuterium -tritium reaction have overlooked 
key facts in their eagerness to prove nuclear fusion practical.  
(C) Nuclear scientists may have overestimated the  amount of lithium actually 
available in the Earths crust.  
(D) Nuclear scientists have not been entirely dispassionate in their investigation 
of the deuterium -tritium reaction.  
(E) Nuclear scientists have insufficiently investigated the lithium -to-tritium 
reaction in nuclear fusion.  
No. 4 -3 
SECTION A  
Great comic art is never otherwordly, it does not seek to mystify us, and it does not deny 
ambiguity by branding as evil whatev er differs from good. Great comic artists assume that truth 
may bear all lights, and thus they seek to accentuate contradictions in social action, not gloss 
over or transcend them by appeals to extrasocial symbols of divine ends, cosmic purpose, or 
laws of nature. The moment of transcendence in great comic art is a social moment, born out of 
the conviction that we are human, even though we try to be gods. The comic community to 
which artists address themselves is a community of reasoning,  loving, joyful, compassionate 
beings, who are willing to assume the human risks of acting rationally. Without invoking gods or 
demons, great comic art arouses courage in reason, courage which grows out of trust in what 
human beings can do as humans.  
17. The passage suggests that great comic art can be characterized as optimistic about 
the ability of humans to  
(A) rid themselves of pride  
(B) transcend the human condition   GRE  351 
 (C) differentiate clearly between good and evil  
(D) avoid social conflicts  
(E) act r ationally  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that the author admires great comic artists 
primarily for their  
(A) ability to understand the frequently subtle differences between good and evil  
(B) ability to reconcile the contradictions in human behavio r 
(C) ability to distinguish between rational and irrational behavior  
(D) insistence on confronting the truth about the human condition  
(E) insistence on condemning human faults and weaknesses  
19. Which of the following is the most accurate description of the organization of the 
passage?  
(A) A sequence of observations leading to a prediction  
(B) A list of inferences drawn from facts st ated at the beginning of the passage  
(C) A series of assertions related to one general subject  
(D) A statement of the major idea, followed by specific examples  
(E) A succession of ideas moving from specific to general  
It has long been known that the rat e of oxidative metabolism (the process that uses 
oxygen to convert food into energy) in any animal has a profound effect on its living patterns. 
The high metabolic rate of small animals, for example, gives them sustained power and activity 
per unit of weig ht, but at the cost of  requiring constant consumption of food and water. Very 
large animals, with their relatively low metabolic rates, can survive well on a sporadic food 
supply, but can generate little metabolic energy per gram of body weight. If only oxidative 
metabo lic rate is considered, therefore, one might assume that smaller, more active, animals 
could prey on larger ones, at least if they attacked in groups. Perhaps they could if it were not 
for anaerobic glycolysis, the great equalizer.  
Anaerobic glycolysis is a process in which energy is produced, without oxygen, through the 
breakdown of muscle glycogen into lactic acid and adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the energy 
provider. The amount of energy that can be produced anaerobically is a function of the amount 
of glycogen present in all vertebrates about 0.5 percent of their muscles wet weight. Thus the 
anaerobic energy reserves of a vertebrate are proportional to the size of the animal. If, for 
example, some predators had attacked a 100 -ton dinosaur, normally torp id, the dinosaur would 
have been able to generate almost instantaneously, via anaerobic glycolysis, the energy of 
3,000 humans at maximum oxidative metabolic energy production. This explains how many 
large species have managed to compete with their more ac tive neighbors: the compensation 
for a low oxidative metabolic rate is glycolysis.  
There are limitations, however, to this compensation. The glycogen reserves of any animal 
are good, at most, for only about two minutes at maximum effort, after which only t he normal 
oxidative metabolic source of energy remains. With the conclusion of a burst of activity, the 
lactic acid level is high in the body fluids, leaving the large animal vulnerable to attack until the 352 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 acid is reconverted, via oxidative metabolism, by the liver into glucose, which is then sent (in 
part) back to the muscles for glycogen resynthesis. During this process the enormous energy 
debt that the animal has run up  through anaerobic glycolysis must be repaid, a debt that is 
proporti onally much greater for the larger vertebrates than for the smaller ones. Whereas the 
tiny shrew can replace in minutes the glycogen used for maximum effort, for example, the 
gigantic dinosaur would have required more than three weeks. It might seem that t his 
interminably long recovery time in a large vertebrate would prove a grave disadvantage for 
survival. Fortunately, muscle glycogen is used only when needed and even then only in 
whatever quantity is necessary. Only in times of panic or during mortal com bat would the entire 
reserves be consumed.  
20. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) refute a misconception about anaerobic glycolysis  
(B) introduce a new hypothesis about anaerobic glycolysis  
(C) describe the limitations of anaerobic glycolysis  
(D) analyze the chemistry of anaerobic glycolysis and its similarity to oxidative 
metabolism  
(E) explain anaerobic glycolysis and its effects on animal survival  
21. According to the author, glycogen is crucial to the process of anaerobic glycolysis 
because glycogen  
(A) increases the organisms need for ATP  
(B) reduces the amount of ATP in the tissues  
(C) is an inhibitor of the oxidative metabolic production of ATP  
(D) ensures that the synthesis of ATP will occur speedily  
(E) is the material from which ATP is derived  
22. According to the author, a major limitation of anaerobic glycolysis is t hat it can  
(A) produce in large animals more lactic acid than the liver can safely reconvert  
(B) necessitate a dangerously long recovery period in large animals  
(C) produce energy more slowly than it can be used by large animals  
(D) consume all of the avai lable glycogen regardless of need  
(E) reduce significantly the rate at which energy is produced by oxidative 
metabolism  
23. The passage suggests that the total anaerobic energy reserves of a vertebrate are 
proportional to the vertebrates size because  
(A) larger vertebrates conserve mo re energy than smaller vertebrates  
(B) larger vertebrates use less oxygen per unit weight than smaller vertebrates  
(C) the ability of a vertebrate to consume food is a function of its size  
(D) the amount of muscle tissue in a vertebrate is directly related  to its size  
(E) the size of a vertebrate is proportional to the quantity of energy it can utilize   GRE  353 
 24. The author suggests that, on the basis of energy production, a 100 -ton dinosaur 
would have been markedly vulnerable to which of the following?  
I. Repeated attacks  by a single smaller, more active adversary  
II. Sustained attack by numerous smaller, more active adversaries  
III. An attack by an individual adversary of similar size  
(A) II only  
(B) I and II only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and I II 
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the time required to replenish muscle 
glycogen following anaerobic glycolysis is determined by which of the following 
factors?  
I. Rate of oxidative metabolism  
II. Quantity of lactic acid in the body fluids  
III. Percentage of glucose that is returned to the muscles  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) I and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
26. The author is most probably addressing which of the following audiences?  
(A) College students in an introductory course on animal physiology  
(B) Historians of science investigating the discovery of anaerobic glycolysis  
(C) Gradua te students with specialized training in comparative anatomy  
(D) Zoologists interested in prehistoric animals  
(E) Biochemists doing research on oxidative metabolism  
27. Which of the following best states the central idea of the passage?  
(A) The disadvan tage of a low oxidative metabolic rate in large animals can be 
offset by their ability to convert substantial amounts of glycogen into energy.  
(B) The most significant problem facing animals that have used anaerobic 
glycolysis for energy is the resynthesis  of its by -product, glucose, into 
glycogen.  
(C) The benefits to animals of anaerobic glycolysis are offset by the profound 
costs that must be paid.  
(D) The major factor ensuring that a large animal will triumph over a smaller 
animal is the large animals a bility to produce energy via anaerobic 
glycolysis.  354 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) The great differences that exist in metabolic rates between species of small 
animals and species of large animals can have important effects on the 
patterns of their activities.  
SECTION B 
The dark r egions in the starry night sky are not pockets in the universe that are devoid of 
stars as had long been thought. Rather, they are dark because of interstellar dust that hides the 
stars behind it. Although its visual effect is so pronounced, dust is only a  minor constituent of 
the material, extremely low in density, that lies between the stars. Dust accounts for about one 
percent of the total mass of interstellar matter. The rest is hydrogen and helium gas, with small 
amounts of other elements. The interste llar material, rather like terrestrial clouds, comes in all 
shapes and sizes. The average density of interstellar material in the vicinity of our Sun is 1,000 
to 10,000 times less than the best terrestrial laboratory vacuum. It is only because of the 
enorm ous interstellar distances that so little material per unit of volume becomes so significant. 
Optical astronomy is most directly affected, for although interstellar gas is perfectly transparent, 
the dust is not.  
17. According to the passage, which of the f ollowing is a direct perceptual 
consequence of interstellar dust?  
(A) Some stars are rendered invisible to observers on Earth.  
(B) Many visible stars are made to seem brighter than they really are.  
(C) The presence of hydrogen and helium gas is revealed.  
(D) The night sky appears dusty at all times to observers on Earth.  
(E) The dust is conspicuously visible against a background of bright stars.  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that the density of interstellar material is  
(A) higher where distances between the stars are shorter  
(B) equal to that of interstellar dust 
(C) unusually low in the vicinity of our Sun  
(D) independent of the incidence of gaseous components  
(E) not homogeneous throughout interstellar space  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that it is because space is so vast that  
(A) little of the  interstellar material in it seems substantial  
(B) normal units of volume seem futile for measurements of density  
(C) stars can be far enough from Earth to be obscured even by very sparsely 
distributed matter  
(D) interstellar gases can, for all practical p urposes, be regarded as transparent  
(E) optical astronomy would be of little use even if no interstellar dust existed  
In his 1976 study of slavery in the United States, Herbert Gutman, like Fogel, Engerman, 
and Genovese, has rightly stressed the slaves achievements. But unlike these his torians, 
Gutman gives plantation owners little credit for these achievements. Rather, Gutman argues  GRE  355 
 that one must look to the Black family and the slaves extended kinship system to understand 
how crucial achievements, such as the maintenance of a cultural  heritage and the development 
of a communal consciousness, were possible. His findings compel attention.  
Gutman recreates the family and extended kinship structure mainly through an ingenious 
use of what any historian should draw upon , quantifiable data, derived in this case mostly from 
plantation birth registers. He also uses accounts of ex -slaves to probe the human reality behind 
his statistics. These sources indicate that the two -parent household predominated in slave 
quarters ju st as it did among freed slaves after emancipation. Although Gutman admits that 
forced separation by sale was frequent, he shows that the slaves preference, revealed most 
clearly on plantations where sale was infrequent, was very much for stable monogamy.  In less 
conclusive fashion Fogel, Engerman, and Genovese had already indicated the predominance of 
two-parent households; however, only Gutman emphasizes the preference for stable 
monogamy and points out what stable monogamy meant for the slaves cultural  heritage. 
Gutman argues convincingly that the stability of the Black family encouraged the transmission 
ofand so was crucial in sustaining the Black heritage of folklore, music, and religious 
expression from one generation to another, a heritage that sla ves were continually fashioning 
out of their African and American experiences.  
Gutmans examination of other facets of kinship also produces important findings. Gutman 
discovers that cousins rarely married, an exogamous tendency that contrasted sharply wit h the 
endogamy practiced by the plantation owners. This preference for exogamy, Gutman suggests, 
may have derived from West African rules governing marriage, which, though they differed 
from one tribal group to another, all involved some kind of prohibitio n against unions with close 
kin. This taboo against cousins marrying is important, argues Gutman, because it is one of 
many indications of a strong awareness among slaves of an extended kinship network. The fact 
that distantly related kin would care for c hildren separated from their families also suggests this 
awareness. When blood relationships were few, as in newly created plantations in the 
Southwest, fictive kinship arrangements took their place until a new pattern of consanguinity 
developed. Gutman presents convincing evidence that this extended kinship structure which 
he believes developed by the mid -to-late eighteenth century provided the foundations for the 
strong communal consciousness that existed among slaves.  
In sum, Gutmans study is signific ant because it offers a closely reasoned and original 
explanation of some of the slaves achievements, one that correctly emphasizes the resources 
that slaves themselves possessed.  
20. According to the passage, Fogel , Engerman, Genovese, and Gutman have al l 
done which of the following?  
I. Discounted the influence of plantation owners on slaves achievements.  
II. Emphasized the achievements of slaves.  
III. Pointed out the prevalence of the two -parent household among slaves.  
IV . Showed the connection between stable monogamy and slaves cultural 
heritage.  
(A) I and II only  
(B) I and IV only  356 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) II and III only  
(D) I, III, and IV only  
(E) II, III, and IV only  
21. With which of the following statements regarding the resources that historians 
ought to use would  the author of the passage be most likely to agree?  
(A) Historians ought to make use of written rather than oral accounts.  
(B) Historians should rely primarily on birth registers.  
(C) Historians should rely exclusively on data that can be quantified.  
(D) H istorians ought to make use of data that can be quantified.  
(E) Historians ought to draw on earlier historical research but they should do so in 
order to refute it.  
22. Which of the following statements about the formation of the Black heritage of 
folklore, music, and religious expression is best supported by t he information 
presented in the passage?  
(A) The heritage was formed primarily out of the experiences of those slaves who 
attempted to preserve the stability of their families.  
(B) The heritage was not formed out of the experiences of those slaves who 
marr ied their cousins.  
(C) The heritage was formed more out of the African than out of the American 
experiences of slaves.  
(D) The heritage was not formed out of the experiences of only a single 
generation of slaves.  
(E) The heritage was formed primarily out of slaves experiences of 
interdependence on newly created plantations in the Southwest.  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that, of the following, the most probable 
reason why a historian of slavery might  be interested in studying the type of 
plantations mentioned in line 25 is that this type would  
(A) give the historian access to the most complete plantation birth registers  
(B) permit the historian to observe the kinship patterns that had been most 
popula r among West African tribes  
(C) provide the historian with evidence concerning the preference of freed slaves 
for stable monogamy  
(D) furnish the historian with the opportunity to discover the kind of marital 
commitment that slaves themselves chose to have  
(E) allow the historian to examine the influence of slaves preferences on the 
actions of plantation owners  
24. According to the passage, all of the following are true of the West African rules 
governing marriage mentioned in lines 46 -50 EXCEPT:  
(A) Th e rules were derived from rules governing fictive kinship arrangements.   GRE  357 
 (B) The rules forbade marriages between close kin.  
(C) The rules are mentioned in Herbert Gutmans study.  
(D) The rules were not uniform in all respects from one West African tribe to 
another.  
(E) The rules have been considered to be a possible source of slaves marriage 
preferences.  
25. Which of the following statements concerning the marriage practices of 
plantation owners during the period of Black slavery in the United States can 
most lo gically be inferred from the information in the passage ? 
(A) These practices began to alter sometime around the mid -eighteenth century.  
(B) These practices varied markedly from one region of the country to another.  
(C) Plantation owners usually based their  choice of marriage partners on 
economic considerations.  
(D) Plantation owners often married earlier than slaves.  
(E) Plantation owners often married their cousins.  
26. Which of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) The author compares and contrasts the work of several historians and then 
discusses areas for possible new research.  
(B) T he author presents his thesis, draws on the work of several historians for 
evidence to support his thesis, and concludes by reiterating his thesis.  
(C) The author describes some features of a historical study and then uses those 
features to put forth his o wn argument.  
(D) The author summarizes a historical study, examines two main arguments 
from the study, and then shows how the arguments are potentially in conflict 
with one another.  
(E) The author presents the general argument of a historical study, describes the 
study in more detail, and concludes with a brief judgments of the studys 
value.  
27. Which of the following is the most appropriate title for the passage, based on its 
content?  
(A) The Influence of Herbert Gutman on Historians of Slavery in the United 
States  
(B) Gutmans Explanation of How Slaves Could Maintain a Cultural Heritage and 
Develop a Communal Consciousness  
(C) Slavery in the United States: New Controversy About an Old Subject  
(D) The Black Heritage of Folklore, Music, and Religious Expression: Its 
Growing Influence  
(E) The Black Family and Extended Kinship Structure: How They Were 
Important for the Freed Slave  358 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 No. 5 -1 
SECTION A  
A Marxist sociologist has argued that racism stems from the class struggle that is unique to 
the capitalist  system that racial prejudice is generated by capitalists as a means of controlling 
workers. His thesis works relatively well when applied to discrimination against Blacks in the 
United States, but his definition of racial prejudice as racially -based negative prejudgments 
against a gr oup generally accepted as a race in any given region of ethnic competition, can be 
interpreted as also including hostility toward such ethnic groups as the Chinese in California and 
the Jews in medieval Europe. However, since prejudice against these latte r peoples was not 
inspired by capitalists, he has to reason that such antagonisms were not really based on race. 
He disposes  thusly (albeit unconvincingly) of both the intolerance faced by Jews before the ris e 
of capitalism and the early twentieth -century discrimination against Oriental people in California, 
which, inconveniently, was instigated by workers.  
17. The passage supplies information that would answer which of the following 
questions?  
(A) What accoun ts for the prejudice against the Jews in medieval Europe?  
(B) What conditions caused the discrimination against Oriental people in 
California in the early twentieth century?  
(C) Which groups are not in ethnic competition with each other in the United 
State s? 
(D) What explanation did the Marxist sociologist give for the existence of racial 
prejudice?  
(E) What evidence did the Marxist sociologist provide to support his thesis?  
18. The author considers the Marxist sociologists thesis about the origins of racial 
prejudice to be  
(A) unoriginal  
(B) unpersuasive  
(C) offensive  
(D) obscure  
(E) speculat ive 
19. It can be inferred from the passage that the Marxist sociologist would argue that 
in a noncapitalist society racial prejudice would be  
(A) pervasive  
(B) tolerated  
(C) ignored  
(D) forbidden  
(E) nonexistent   GRE  359 
 20. According to the passage, the Marxis t sociologists chain of reasoning required 
him to assert that prejudice toward Oriental people in California was  
(A) directed primarily against the Chinese  
(B) similar in origin to prejudice against the Jews  
(C) understood by Oriental people as ethnic com petition  
(D) provoked by workers  
(E) nonracial in character  
By 1950, the results of attempts to relate brain processes to mental experience appeared 
rather discouraging. Such variations in size, shape, chemistry, conduction speed, excitation 
threshold, and the like as had been demonst rated in nerve cells remained negligible in 
significance for any possible correlation with the manifold dimensions of mental experience.  
Near the turn of the century, it had been suggested by Hering that different modes of 
sensation, such as pain, taste, a nd color, might be correlated with the discharge of specific 
kinds of nervous energy. However, subsequently developed methods of recording and analyzing 
nerve potentials failed to reveal any such qualitative diversity. It was possible to demonstrate by 
other methods refined structural differences among neuron types; however, proof was lacking 
that the quality of the impulse or its condition was influenced by these differences, which 
seemed instead to influence the developmental patterning of the neural circ uits. Although 
qualitative variance among nerve energies was never rigidly disproved, the doctrine was 
generally abandoned in favor of the opposing view, namely, that nerve impulses are essentially 
homogeneous in quality and are transmitted as common curr ency throughout the nervous 
system. According to this theory, it is not the quality of the sensory nerve  impulses that 
determines the diverse conscious sensations they produce, but rather the different areas of the 
brain into which t hey discharge, and there is some evidence for this view. In one experiment, 
when an electric stimulus was applied to a given sensory field of the cerebral cortex of a 
conscious human subject, it produced a sensation of the appropriate modality  for that particular 
locus, that is, a visual sensation from the visual cortex, an auditory sensation from the auditory 
cortex, and so on. Other experiments revealed slight variations in the size, number, 
arrangement, and interconnection of the nerve cells, but as far as psychoneural correlations 
were concerned, the obvious similarities of these sensory fields to each other seemed much 
more remarkable than any of the minute differences.  
However, cortical locus, in itself, turned out to have littl e explanatory value. Studies 
showed that sensations as diverse as those of red, black, green, and white, or touch, cold, 
warmth, movement, pain, posture, and pressure apparently may arise through activation of the 
same cortical areas. What seemed to remain  was some kind of differential patterning effects in 
the brain excitation: it is the difference in the central distribution of impulses that counts. In 
short, brain theory suggested a correlation between mental experience and the activity of 
relatively hom ogeneous nerve -cell units conducting essentially homogeneous impulses through 
homogeneous cerebral tissue. To match the multiple dimensions of mental experience 
psychologists could only point to a limitless variation in the spatiotemporal patterning of ner ve 
impulses.  
21. The author suggests that, by 1950, attempts to correlate mental experience with 360 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 brain processes would probably have been viewed with  
(A) indignation  
(B) impatience  
(C) pessimism  
(D) indifference  
(E) defiance  
22. The author mentions com mon currency in line 26 primarily in order to 
emphasize the  
(A) lack of differentiation among nerve impulses in human beings  
(B) similarity of the sensations that all human beings experience  
(C) similarities in the views of scientists who have studied the  human nervous 
system  
(D) continuous passage of nerve impulses through the nervous system  
(E) recurrent questioning by scientists of an accepted explanation about the 
nervous system  
23. The description in lines 32 -38 of an experiment in which electric stimuli were 
applied to different sensory fields of the cerebral cortex tends to support t he 
theory that  
(A) the simple presence of different cortical areas cannot account for the diversity 
of mental experience  
(B) variation in spatiotemporal patterning of nerve impulses correlates with 
variation in subjective experience  
(C) nerve impulses are essentially homogeneous and are relatively unaffected as 
they travel through the nervous system  
(D) the mental experiences produced by sensory nerve impulses are determined 
by the cortical area activated  
(E) variation in neuron types affects the quality of nerve impulses  
24. According to the passage, some evidence exists that the area of the cortex 
activated by a sensory stimulus determines which of the following?  
I. The nature of the nerve impulse  
II. The modality of the sensory experience  
III. Qualitative differences within a modality  
(A) II only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II and III  
25. The passage can most accurately be described as a discussion concerning  GRE  361 
 historica l views of the  
(A) anatomy of the brain  
(B) manner in which nerve impulses are conducted  
(C) significance of different cortical areas in mental experience  
(D) mechanics of sense perception  
(E) physiological correlates of mental experience  
26. Which of t he following best summarizes the authors opinion of the suggestion 
that different areas of the brain determine perceptions produced by sensory nerve 
impulses?  
(A) It is a plausible explanation, but it has not been completely proved.  
(B) It is the best exp lanation of brain processes currently available.  
(C) It is disproved by the fact that the various areas of the brain are 
physiologically very similar.  
(D) There is some evidence to support it, but it fails to explain the diversity of 
mental experience.  
(E) There is experimental evidence that confirms its correctness.  
27. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following exhibit the 
LEAST qualitative variation?  
(A) Nerve cells  
(B) Nerve impulses  
(C) Cortical areas  
(D) Spatial patterns of  nerve impulses  
(E) Temporal patterns of nerve impulses  
SECTION B 
The transfer of heat and water vapor from the ocean to the air above it depends on a 
disequilibrium at the interface of the water and the air. Within about a millimeter of the water, 
air temperature is close to that of the surface water , and the air is nearly saturated with water 
vapor. But the differences, however small, are crucial, and the disequilibrium is maintained by 
air near the surface mixing with air hig her up, which is typically appreciably cooler and lower in 
water -vapor content. The air is mixed by means of turbulence that depends on the wind for its 
energy. As wind speed increases, so does turbulence, and thus the rate of heat and moisture 
transfer. D etailed understanding of this phenomenon awaits further study. An interacting and 
complicating phenomenon is wind -to-water transfer of momentum that occurs when waves 
are formed. When the wind makes waves, it transfers important amounts of energy energy 
that is therefore not available to provide turbulence.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) resolve a controversy  
(B) describe a phenomenon  362 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) outline a theory  
(D) confirm research findings  
(E) classify various observations  
18. According to t he passage, wind over the ocean generally does which of the 
following?  
I. Causes relatively cool, dry air to come into proximity with the ocean surface.  
II. Maintains a steady rate of heat and moisture transfer between the ocean and 
the air.  
III. Causes fr equent changes in the temperature of the water at the ocean s 
surface.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that the author regards current knowledge 
about heat and moisture transfer from the ocean to air as  
(A) revolutionary  
(B) inconsequential  
(C) outdated  
(D) derivative  
(E) incomplete  
20. The p assage suggests that if on a certain day the wind were to decrease until there 
was no wind at all which of the following would occur?  
(A) The air closest to the ocean surface would become saturated with water vapor.  
(B) The air closest to the ocean surface  would be warmer than the water.  
(C) The amount of moisture in the air closest to the ocean surface would 
decrease.  
(D) The rate of heat and moisture transfer would increase.  
(E) The air closest to the ocean would be at the same temperature as air higher up.  
Extraordinary creative activity has been characterized as revolutionary, flying in the face of 
what is established and producing not what is acceptable but what will be come accepted. 
According to this formulation, highly creative activity transcends the limits of an existing form 
and establishes a new principle of organization. However, the idea that extraordinary creativity 
transcends established limits i s misleading wh en it is applied to the arts, even though it may be 
valid for the sciences. Differences between highly creative art and highly creative science arise 
in part from a difference in their goals. For the sciences, a new theory is the goal and end result 
of the  creative act. Innovative science produces new propositions in terms of which diverse 
phenomena can be related to one another in more coherent ways. Such phenomena as a  GRE  363 
 brilliant diamond or a nesting bird are relegated to the role of data, serving as the m eans for 
formulating or testing a new theory. The goal of highly creative art is very different: the 
phenomenon itself becomes the direct product of the creative act. Shakespeare s Hamlet  is not 
a tract about the behavior of indecisive princes or the uses of political power; nor is Picasso s 
painting Guernica  primarily a propositional statement about the Spanish Civil War or the evils of 
fascism. What highly creative artistic activity produces is not a new generalization that 
transcends established limits, but rather an aesthetic particular. Aesthetic particulars produced 
by the highly creative artist extend or exploit, in an innovative way, the limits of an existing form, 
rather than transcend that form.  
This is not to deny that a highly creative artist som etimes establishes a new principle of 
organization in the history of an artistic field ; the composer Monteverdi,  who created music of 
the highest aesthetic value, comes to mind. More generally, however, whether or not  a 
composition establishes a new principle in the history of music has little bearing on its aesthetic 
worth. Because they embody a new principle of organization, some musical works, such as the 
operas of the Florentine Camerata, are of signal historical importa nce, but few listeners or 
musicologists would include these among the great works of music. On the other hand, 
Mozart s The Marriage  of Figaro  is surely among the masterpieces of music even though its 
modest innovations are confined to extending existing m eans. It has been said of Beethoven 
that he toppled the rules and freed music from the stif ling confines of convention. But a close 
study of his compositions reveals that Beethoven overturned no fundamental rules. Rather, he 
was an incomparable strategist who exploited limits the rules, forms, and conventions that he 
inherited from predecessors such as Haydn and Mozart, Handel and Bach in strikingly original 
ways.  
21. The author considers a new theory that coherently relates diverse phenomena to 
one another  to be the  
(A) basis for reaffirming a well -established scientific formulation  
(B) byproduct of an aesthetic experience  
(C) tool used by a scientist to discover a new particular  
(D) synthesis underlying a great work of art  
(E) result of highly creative scientific activity  
22. The author implies that Beethoven s music was strikingly original because 
Beethoven  
(A) strove to outdo his predecessors by becoming the first composer to exploit 
limits  
(B) fundamentally changed the musical forms of his predecessor s by adopting a 
richly inventive strategy  
(C) embellished and interwove the melodies of several of the great composers 
who preceded him  
(D) manipulated the established conventions of musical composition in a highly 
innovative fashion  
(E) attempted to create the illusion of having transcended the musical forms of his 364 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 predecessors  
23. The passage states that the operas of the Florentine Camerata are  
(A) unjustifiably ignored by musicologists  
(B) not generally considered to be of high  aesthetic value even though they are 
important in the history of music  
(C) among those works in which popular historical themes were portrayed in a 
musical production  
(D) often inappropriately cited as examples of musical works in which a new 
principle of  organization was introduced  
(E) minor exceptions to the well -established generalization that the aesthetic 
worth of a composition determines its importance in the history of music  
24. The passage supplies information for answering all of the following questions 
EXCEPT:  
(A) Has un usual creative activity been characterized as revolutionary?  
(B) Did Beethoven work within a musical tradition that also included Handel and 
Bach?  
(C) Is Mozarts The Marriage of Figaro  an example of a creative work that 
transcended limits?  
(D) Who besides  Monteverdi wrote music that the author would consider to 
embody new principles of organization and to be of high aesthetic value?  
(E) Does anyone claim that the goal of extraordinary creative activity in the arts 
differs from that of extraordinary creative activity in the sciences?  
25. The author regards the idea that all highly creative artistic activity transcends 
limits with  
(A) deep skepticism  
(B) strong indignation  
(C) marked indifference  
(D) moderate amusement  
(E) sharp derision  
26. The author implies that an innovative scientific contribution is one that  
(A) is cited with high frequency in the publications of other scien tists 
(B) is accepted immediately by the scientific community  
(C) does not relegate particulars to the role of data  
(D) presents the discovery of a new scientific fact  
(E) introduces a new valid generalization  
27. Which of the following statements would  most logically concluded the last 
paragraph of the passage?  
(A) Unlike Beethoven, however, even the greatest of modern composers, such as  GRE  365 
 Stravinsky, did not transcend existing musical forms.  
(B) In similar fashion, existing musical forms were even furthe r exploited by the 
next generation of great European composers.  
(C) Thus, many of the great composers displayed the same combination of talents 
exhibited by Monteverdi.  
(D) By contrast, the view that creativity in the arts exploits but does not transcend 
limits is supported in the field of literature.  
(E) Actually, Beethovens most original works were largely unappreciated at the 
time that they were first performed.  
No. 5 -2 
SECTION A  
Visual recognition involves storing and retrieving  memories. Neural act ivity, triggered by 
the eye, forms an image in the brain s memory system that constitutes an internal 
representation of the viewed object. When an object is encountered again, it is matched with 
its internal representation and thereby recognized. Controver sy surrounds the question of 
whether recognition is a parallel, one -step process or a serial, step -by-step one. Psychologists 
of the Gestalt school maintain that objects are recognized as wholes in a parallel procedure: the 
internal representation is match ed with the retinal image  in a single operation. Other 
psychologists have proposed that internal representation features are matched serially with an 
object s features. Although some experiments show that, as an object becomes familia r, its 
internal representation becomes more holistic and the recognition process correspondingly 
more parallel, the weight of evidence seems to support the serial hypothesis, at least for 
objects that are not notably simple and familiar.  
17. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) explaining how the brain receives images  
(B) synthesizing hypotheses of visual recognition  
(C) examining the evidence supporting the serial  recognition hypothesis  
(D) discussing visual recognition and some hypotheses proposed t o explain it  
(E) reporting on recent experiments dealing with memory systems and their 
relationship to neural activity  
18. According to the passage, Gestalt psychologists make which of the following 
suppositions about visual recognition?  
I. A retinal im age is in exactly the same forms as its internal representation.  
II. An object is recognized as a whole without any need for analysis into  
component parts.  
III. The matching of an object with its internal representation occurs in only one 
step. 
(A) II only  366 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) III only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that the matching process in visual recognition 
is 
(A) not a neural activity  
(B) not possible when an object is viewed for the very first time  
(C) not possible if a feature of a familiar object  is changed in some way  
(D) only possible when a retinal image is received in the brain as a unitary whole  
(E) now fully understood as a combination of the serial and parallel processes  
20. It terms of its tone and form, the passage can best be characte rized as  
(A) a biased exposition  
(B) a speculative study  
(C) a dispassionate presentation  
(D) an indignant denial  
(E) a dogmatic explanation  
In large part as a consequence of the feminist movement, historians have focused a great 
deal of attention in re cent years on determining more accurately the status of women in various 
periods. Although much has been accomplished for the modern period, premodern cultures 
have proved more difficult: sources are restricted in number, fragmentary, difficult to interpre t, 
and often contradictory. Thus it is not particularly surprising that some earlier scholarship 
concerning such cultures has so far gone unchallenged. An example is Johann Bachofen s 1861 
treatise on Amazons, women -ruled societies of questionable existenc e contemporary with 
ancient Greece.  
Starting from the premise that mythology and legend preserve at least a nucleus of 
historical fact, Bachofen argued that women were dominant in many ancient societies. His work 
was based on a comprehensive survey of refe rences in the ancient sources to Amazonian and 
other societies with matrilineal customs societies in which descent and property rights are 
traced through the female line. Some support for his theory can be found in evidence such as 
that drawn from Hero dotus, the Greek historian  of the fifth century B. C., who speaks of an 
Amazonian society, the Sauromatae, where the women hunted and fought in wars. A woman in 
this society was not allowed to marry until she had killed a person in battle.  
Nonetheless, this assumption that the first recorders of ancient myths have preserved facts 
is problematic. If one begins by examining why ancients refer to Amazons, it becomes clear 
that ancient Greek descriptions of such societies were meant not so much to represent 
obser ved historical fact real Amazonian societies but rather to offer moral lessons  on the 
supposed outcome of women s rule in their own society. The Amazons were often characterized, 
for example, as the equivalents of giants and centaurs, enemies to be slain  by Greek heroes. 
Their customs were presented not as those of a respectable society, but as the very antitheses  GRE  367 
 of ordinary Greek practices.  
Thus, I would argue, the purpose of accounts of the Amazons for their male Greek 
recorders was didactic, to teach both male and female Greeks that all -female groups, formed by 
withdrawal from traditional society, are destructive and dangerous. Myths about the Amazons 
were used as arguments for the male -dominated status quo, in which groups composed 
exclusively of eith er sex were not permitted to segregate themselves permanently from society. 
Bachofen was thus misled in his reliance on myths for information about the status of women. 
The sources that will probably tell contemporary historians most about women in the anc ient 
world are such social documents as gravestones, wills, and marriage contracts. Studies of such 
documents have already begun to show how mistaken we are when we try to derive our picture 
of the ancient world exclusively from literary sources, especiall y myths.  
21. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) compare competing new approaches to understanding the role of women in 
ancient societies  
(B) investigate the ramifications of Bachofen s theory about the dominance of 
women in ancient societies  
(C) explain the burgeoning interest among historians in determining the actual 
status of women in various societies  
(D) analyze the nature of Amazonian society and uncover similarities between it 
and the Greek world  
(E) criticize the value of ancient myths in determining the status of women in 
ancient societies  
22. All of the following are stated by the author as problems connected with the 
sources for knowledge of premodern cultures EXCEPT:  
(A) partial completeness  
(B) res tricted accessibility  
(C) difficult y of interpretation  
(D) limited quan tity 
(E) tendency toward contradiction  
23. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about the myths 
recorded by the ancient Greeks?  
I. They sometimes included portrayals of women holding positions of power.  
II. They sometimes contained elabor ate explanations of inheritance customs.  
III. They comprise almost all of the material available to historians about ancient 
Greece.  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  368 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) I, II, and III  
24. Which of the following is presente d in the passage as evidence supporting the 
author s view of the ancient Greeks  descriptions of the Amazons?  
(A) The requirement that Sauromatae women kill in battle before marrying  
(B) The failure of historians to verify that women were ever governors of  ancient 
societies  
(C) The classing of Amazons with giants and centaurs  
(D) The well -established unreliability of Herodotus as a source of information 
about ancient societies  
(E) The recent discovery of ancient societies with matrilineal customs  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the probable reactions of many males in 
ancient Greece to the idea of a society ruled by women could best characterized 
as 
(A) confused and dismayed  
(B) wary and hostile  
(C) cynical and disinterested  
(D) curious but fearful  
(E) excited but anxious  
26. The author suggests that the main reason for the persisting influence of 
Bachofen s work is that  
(A) feminists have shown little interest  in ancient societies  
(B) Bachofen s knowledge of Amazonian culture is unparalleled  
(C) reliable information about the ancient world is difficult to acquire  
(D) ancient societies show the best evidence of women in positions of power  
(E) historians have been primarily interested in the modern period  
27. The author s attitude toward Bachofen s treatise is best described as one of  
(A) qualified approval  
(B) profound ambivalence  
(C) studied neutrality  
(D) pointed disagreement  
(E) unmitigated hostility  
SECTION B 
Initially the Vinaver theory that Malory s eight romances, once thought to be fundamentally 
unified , were in fact eight independent works produced both a sense of relief and an unpleasant 
shock. Vinaver s theory comfortably explained away the appare nt contradictions of chronology 
and made each romance independently satisfying. It was, however, disagreeable to find that 
what had been thought of as one book was now eight books. Part of this response was the  GRE  369 
 natural reaction to the disturbance of set id eas. Nevertheless, even now, after lengthy 
consideration of the theory s refined but legitimate observations, one cannot avoid the 
conclusion that the eight romances are only one work. It is not quite a matter of disagreeing 
with the theory of independence , but of rejecting its implications : that the romances may be 
taken in any or no particular order, that they have no cumulative effect, and that they are as 
separate as the works of a modern novelist.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) discus s the validity of a hypothesis  
(B) summarize a system of general principles  
(C) propose guidelines for future argument  
(D) stipulate conditions for acceptance of an interpretation  
(E) deny accusations about an apparent contradiction  
18. It can be inferr ed from the passage that the author believes which of the follow ing 
about Malory s works?  
I. There are meaningful links between and among the romances.  
II. The subtleties of the romances are obscured when they are taken as one 
work.  
III. Any contradictions  in chronology among the romances are less important 
than their overall unity.  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
19. The author of the passage concedes which of the following about the Vinaver 
theory?  
(A) It gives a clearer understanding of the unity of Malory s romances.  
(B) It demonstrates the irrationality of considering Malory s romances to  be 
unified.  
(C) It establishes acceptable links between Malory s romances  and modern 
novels.  
(D) It unifies earlier and later theories concerning the chronology of Malory s 
romances.  
(E) It makes valid and subtle comments about Malory s romances.  
20. It can be inferred from the passage that, in evaluating the Vinaver theory, some 
critics were  
(A) frequently misled by the inconsistencies in Malory s work  
(B) initially biased by previous interpretations of Malory s work  370 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) conceptually displeased by the general interpretation that Vinaver rejected  
(D) generally in agreement with Vinaver s comparisons between Malory and 
modern novelists  
(E) originally skeptical about Vinaver s early conclusions with respect to modern 
novels  
We can distinguish three different realms of matter, three levels on the quantum ladder. 
The first is the atomic realm, which includes the world of atoms, their in teractions, and the 
structures that are formed by them, such as molecules, liquids and solids, and gases and 
plasmas. This realm includes all the phenomena of atomic physics, chemistry, and, in a certain 
sense, biology. The energy exchanges taking place in  this realm are of a relatively low order. If 
these exchanges are below one electron volt, such as in the collisions between molecules of the 
air in a room, then atoms and molecules can be regarded as elementary particles. That is, they 
have conditional e lementarity  because they keep their identity and do not change in any 
collisions or in other processes at these low energy exchanges. If one goes to higher energy 
exchanges, say 104 electron volts, then atoms and molecules will decompose into nuclei and 
electrons;  at this level, the latter particles must be considered as elementary. We find examples 
of structures and processes of this first rung of the quantum ladder on Earth, on planets, and 
on the surfaces of stars.  
The next rung is the nuclear realm. He re the energy exchanges are much higher, on the 
order of millions of electron volts. As long as we are dealing with phenomena in the atomic 
realm, such amounts of energy are unavailable, and most nuclei are inert: they do not change. 
However, if one applie s energies of millions of electron volts, nuclear reactions, fission and 
fusion, and the processes of radioactivity occur; our elementary particles then are protons, 
neutrons, and electrons. In addition, nuclear processes produce neutrinos, particles that have 
no detectable mass or charge. In the universe, energies at this level are available in the centers 
of stars and in star explosions. Indeed, the energy radiated by the stars is produced by nuclear 
reactions. The natural radioactivity we find on Earth i s the long -lived remnant of the time when 
now-earthly matter was expelled into space by a major stellar explosion.  
The third rung of the quantum ladder is the subnuclear realm. Here we are dealing with 
energy exchanges of many billions of electron volts. W e encounter excited nucleons, new types 
of particles such as mesons, heavy electrons, quarks, and gluons, and also antimatter in large 
quantities. The gluons are the quanta, or smallest units, of the force (the strong force) that 
keeps the quarks together.  As long as we are dealing with the atomic or nuclear realm, these 
new types of particles do not occur and the nucleons remain inert. But at subnuclear energy 
levels, the nucleons and mesons appear to be composed of quarks, so that the quarks and 
gluons figure as  elementary particles.  
21. The primary topic of the passage is which of the following?  
(A) The interaction of the realms on the quantum ladder  
(B) Atomic structures found on Earth, on other planets, and on the surfaces of 
stars 
(C) Levels of energy that are released in nuclear reactions on Earth and in stars  
(D) Particles and processes found in the atomic, nuclear, and subnuclear realms   GRE  371 
 (E) New types of particles occurring in the atomic realm  
22. According  to the passage, radi oactivity that occurs naturally on Earth is the result 
of 
(A) the production of particles that have no detectable mass or electric charge  
(B) high energy exchanges on the nuclear level that occurred in an ancient 
explosion in a star  
(C) processes that occu r in the center of the Sun, which emits radiation to the 
Earth  
(D) phenomena in the atomic realm that cause atoms and molecules to decompose 
into nuclei and electrons  
(E) high -voltage discharges of electricity that took place in the atmosphere of the 
Earth shortly after the Earth was formed  
23. The author organizes the passage by  
(A) making distinctions between two groups of particles, those that are 
elementary and those that are composite  
(B) explaining three methods of transferring energy to atoms and to the smaller 
particles that constitute atoms  
(C) describing several levels of processes, increasing in energy, and 
corresponding sets of particles, generally decrea sing in size  
(D) putting forth an argument concerning energy levels and then conceding that 
several qualifications of that argument are necessary  
(E) making several successive refinements of a definition of elementarity on the 
basis of several groups of experimental results  
24. According to the passage, which of the following can be found in the atomic 
realm?  
(A) More than one level of energy ex change  
(B) Exactly one elementary particle  
(C) Exactly three kinds of atomic structures  
(D) Three levels on the quantum ladder  
(E) No particles smaller than atoms  
25. According to the author, gluons are not  
(A) considered to be detectable  
(B) produced i n nuclear reactions  
(C) encountered in subnuclear energy exchanges  
(D) related to the strong force  
(E) found to be conditionally elementary  
26. At a higher energy level than the subnuclear level described, if such a higher level 
exists, it can be expect ed on the basis of the information in the passage that there 372 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 would probably be  
(A) excited nucleons  
(B) elementary mesons  
(C) a kind of particle without detectable mass or charge  
(D) exchanges of energy on the order of millions of electron volts  
(E) ano ther set of elementary particles  
27. The passage speaks of particles as having conditional elementarity if they  
(A) remain unchanged at given level of energy exchange  
(B) cannot be decomposed into smaller constituents  
(C) are mathematically simpler than so me other set of particles  
(D) release energy at a low level in collisions  
(E) belong to the nuclear level on the quantum ladder  
No. 5 -3 
SECTION A  
The belief that art originates in intuitive rather than rational faculties was worked out 
historically and philosophically in the somewhat wearisome volumes of Benedetto Croce, who  is 
usually considered the originator of a new aesthetic. Croce was, in fact, expressing a very old 
idea. Long before the Romantics stressed intuition and self -expression, the frenzy of inspiration 
was regarded as fundamental to art, but philosophers had a lways assumed it must be 
controlled by law and by the intellectual power of putting things into harmonious order. This 
general philosophic concept of art was supported by technical necessities. It was necessary to 
master certain laws and to use intellect i n order to build Gothic cathedrals, or set up the stained 
glass windows of Chartres. When this bracing element of craftsmanship ceased to dominate 
artists  outlook, new technical elements had to be adopted to maintain the intellectual element 
in art. Such were linear perspective  and anatomy.  
17. The passage suggests that which of the following would most likely have 
occurred if linear perspective and anatomy had not come to influence artistic 
endeavor?  
(A) The craftsmanship that shaped Gothic architecture would have continu ed to 
dominate artists  outlooks.  
(B) Some other technical elements would have been adopted to discipline artistic 
inspiration.  
(C) Intellectual control over artistic inspiration would not have influenced 
painting as it did architecture.  
(D) The role of in tuitive inspiration would not have remained fundamental to 
theories of artistic creation.  
(E) The assumptions of aesthetic philosophers before Croce would have been  GRE  373 
 invalidated.  
18. The passage supplies information for answering which of the following 
questions?  
(A) Does Romantic art exhibit the triumph of intuition over intellect?  
(B) Did an emphasis on linear perspective and anatomy dominate Romantic art?  
(C) Are the intellectual and intuitive faculties harmoniously balanced in 
post-Romantic art?  
(D) Are the effects of the rational control of artistic inspiration evident in the 
great works  of pre -Romantic eras?  
(E) Was the artistic craftsmanship displayed in Gothic cathedrals also an element 
in paintings of this period?  
19. The passage implies that which of the following was a traditional assumption of 
aesthetic philosophers?  
(A) Intellectual elements in art exert a necessary control over artistic inspiration.  
(B) Architecture has never again reached the artistic greatness of the Gothic 
cathedrals.  
(C) Aesthetic philosophy is determined by the technical necessities of art.  
(D) Artistic craftsmanship is more im portant in architectural art than in pictorial 
art. 
(E) Paintings lacked the intellectual element before the invention of linear 
perspective and anatomy.  
20. The author mentions linear perspective and anatomy  in the last sentence in 
order to do which of the following?  
(A) Expand his argument to includ e painting as well as architecture  
(B) Indicate his disagreement with Croce s theory of the origins of art  
(C) Support his point that rational order of some kind has often seemed to 
discipline artistic inspiration  
(D) Explain the rational elements in Gothi c painting that corresponded to 
craftsmanship in Gothic architecture  
(E) Show the increasing sophistication of artists after the Gothic period  
(The passage below is drawn from an article published in 1962.)  
Computer programmers often remark that computing machines, with a perfect lack of 
discrimination, will do any fool ish thing they are told to do. The reason for this lies, of course, in 
the narrow fixation of the computing machine s intelligence  on the details of its own 
perceptions its inability to be guided by any large context. In a psychological description of th e 
computer intelligence, three related adjectives come to mind: single -minded, literal -minded, 
and simpleminded. Recognizing this, we should at the same time recognize that this 
single -mindedness, literal -mindedness, and simplemindedness also characterizes  theoretical 
mathematics, though to a lesser extent.  374 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Since science tries to deal with reality, even the most precise sciences normally work with 
more or less imperfectly understood approximations toward which scientists must maintain an 
appropriate skeptic ism. Thus, for instance, it may come as a shock to mathematicians to learn 
that the Schrodinger equation  for the hydrogen atom is not a literally correct description of this 
atom, but only an approximation to a somewhat more correct equation taking account of spin, 
magnetic dipole , and relativistic effects; and that this corre cted equation is itself only an 
imperfect approximation to an infinite set of quantum field -theoretical equations. Physicists, 
looking at the original Schrodinger equation, learn to sense in it the presence of many invisible 
terms in addition to the differ ential terms visible, and this sense inspires an entirely appropriate 
disregard for the purely technical features of the equation. This very healthy skepticism is 
foreign to the mathematical approach.  
Mathematics must deal with well -defined situations. Thu s, mathematicians depend on an 
intellectual effort outside of mathematics for the crucial specification of the approximation that 
mathematics is to take literally. Give mathematicians a situation that is the least bit ill -defined, 
and they will make it wel l-defined,  perhaps appropriately, but perhaps inappropriately. In some 
cases, the mathematicians  literal -mindedness may have unfortunate consequences. The 
mathematicians turn the scientist s theoretical assumptions, that is, their convenient points of 
analytical emphasis, into axioms, and then take these axioms literally. This brings the danger 
that they may also persuade the scientists to take these axioms literally. The question, central 
to the scientific investigation but intensely disturbing in the mat hematical context what 
happens if the axioms are relaxed? is thereby ignored.  
The physicist rightly dreads precise argument, since an argument that is convincing only if 
it is precise loses all its force if the assumptions on which it is based are slightly  changed, 
whereas an argument that is convincing though imprecise may well be stable under small 
perturbations of its underlying assumptions.  
21. The author discusses computing machines in the first paragraph primarily in order 
to do which of the following ? 
(A) Indicate the dangers inherent in relying to a great extent on machines  
(B) Illustrate his views about the approach of mathematicians to problem solving  
(C) Compare the work of mathematicians with that of computer programmers  
(D) Provide one definitio n of intelligence  
(E) Emphasize the importance of computers in modern technological society  
22. According to the passage, scientists are skeptical toward their equations because 
scientists  
(A) work to explain real, rather than theoretical or simplified,  situations  
(B) know that well -defined problems are often the most difficult to solve  
(C) are unable to express their data in terms of multiple variables  
(D) are unwilling to relax the axioms they have developed  
(E) are unable to accept mathematical exp lanations of natural phenomena  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that scientists make which of the following  GRE  375 
 assumptions about scientific arguments?  
(A) The literal truth of the arguments can be made clear only in a mathematical 
context.  
(B) The argu ments necessarily ignore the central question of scientific 
investigation.  
(C) The arguments probably will be convincing only to other scientists.  
(D) The conclusions of the arguments do not necessarily follow from their 
premises.  
(E) The premises on which the arguments are based may change.  
24. According to the passage, mathematicians present a danger to scientists for which 
of the following reasons?  
(A) Mathematicians may provide theories that are incompatible with those 
alrea dy developed by scientists.  
(B) Mathematicians may define situation in a way that is incomprehensible to 
scientists.  
(C) Mathematicians may convince scientists that theoretical assumptions are 
facts.  
(D) Scientists may come to believe that axiomatic statem ents are untrue.  
(E) Scientists may begin to provide arguments that are convincing but imprecise.  
25. The author suggests that the approach of physicists to solving scientific problems 
is which of the following?  
(A) Practical for scientific purposes  
(B) Detrimental to scientific progress  
(C) Unimportant in most situations  
(D) Expedient, but of little long -term value  
(E) Effective, but rarely recognized as such  
26. The author suggests that a mathematician asked to solve a problem in an 
ill-defined situation would firs t attempt to do which of the following?  
(A) Identify an analogous situation  
(B) Simplify and define the situation  
(C) Vary the underlying assumptions of a description of the situation  
(D) Determine what use would be made of the solution provided  
(E) Eva luate the theoretical assumptions that might explain the situation  
27. The author implies that scientists develop a healthy skepticism because they are 
aware that  
(A) mathematicians are better able to solve problems than are scientists  
(B) changes in axiom atic propositions will inevitably undermine scientific 
arguments  376 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) well -defined situations are necessary for the design of reliable experiments  
(D) mathematical solutions can rarely be applied to real problems  
(E) some factors in most situations must remain unknown  
SECTION B 
In eighteenth -century France and England, reformers rallied around egalitarian ideals, but 
few reformers advocated higher education for women. Although the public decried womens 
lack of  education, it did not encourage learning for its own sake for women. In spite of the 
general prejudice against learned women, there was one place where women could exhibit 
their erudition: the literary salon. Many writers have defined the womans role in the salon as 
that of an intelligent hostess, but the salon had more than a social function for women. It was 
an informal university, too, where women exchanged ideas with educated persons, read their 
own works and heard those of others, and received and ga ve criticism.  
In the 1750s, when salons were firmly established in France, some English women, who 
called themselves Bluestocking, followed the example of the salonnieres  (French salon 
hostesses) and formed their own salons. Most Bluestockings did not w ish to mirror the 
salonnieres ; they simply desired to adapt a proven formula to their own purpose the elevation 
of womens status through moral and intellectual training. Differences in social orientation and 
background can account perhaps for differences in the nature of French and English salons. 
The French salon incorporated aristocratic attitudes that exalted courtly pleasure and 
emphasized artistic accomplishments. The English Bluestockings, originating from a more 
modest background, emphasized learnin g and work over pleasure. Accustomed to the 
regimented life of court circles, salonnieres  tended toward formality in their salons. The English 
women, though somewhat puritanical, were more casual in their approach.  
At first, the Bluestockings did imitate t he salonnieres  by including men in their circles. 
However, as they gained cohesion, the Bluestockings came to regard themselves as a womens 
group and to possess a sense of female solidarity lacking in the salonnieres , who remained 
isolated from one anothe r by the primacy each held in her own salon. In an atmosphere of 
mutual support, the Bluestockings went beyond the salon experience. They traveled, studied, 
worked, wrote for publication, and by their activities challenged the stereotype of the passive 
woman. Although the salonnieres  were aware of sexual inequality, the narrow boundaries of 
their world kept their intellectual pursuits within conventional limits. Many salonnieres , in fact, 
camouflaged their nontraditional activities behind the role of hostes s and deferred to men in 
public . 
Though the Bluestockings were trailblazers when compared with the salonnieres , they 
were not feminists. They were too traditional, too hemmed in  by their generation to demand 
social and political rights. Nonetheless, in th eir desire for education, their willingness to go 
beyond  the confines of the salon in pursuing their interests, and their championing of unity 
among women, the Bluestockings began the process of questioning womens role in society.  
17. Which of the following best states the central idea of the passage?  
(A) The establishment of literary salons was a response to reformers demands for 
social rights for women.   GRE  377 
 (B) Literary salons were originally intended to be a meeting ground for 
intellectua ls of both sexes, but eventually became social gatherings with 
little educational value.  
(C) In England, as in France, the general prejudice against higher education for 
women limited womens function in literary salons to a primarily social one.  
(D) The l iterary salons provided a sounding board for French and English women 
who called for access to all the educational institutions in their societies on 
an equal basis with men.  
(E) For women, who did not have access to higher education as men did, literar y 
salons provided an alternate route to learning and a challenge to some of 
societys basic assumptions about women.  
18. According to the passage, a significant distinction between the salonniere s and 
Bluestockings was in the way each group regarded which of the following?  
(A) The value of acquiring knowledge  
(B) The role of pleasure in the activities of the literary salon  
(C) The desirability of a complete break with societal traditions  
(D) The inclusion of women of different backgrounds in the salons  
(E) The attainment of full social and political equality with men  
19. The author refers to differences in social background between salonnieres  and 
Bluestockings in order to do which of the following?  
(A) Criticize the view that their choices of activi ties were significantly influenced 
by male salon members  
(B) Discuss the reasons why literary salons in France were established before 
those in England  
(C) Question the importance of the Bluestockings in shaping public attitudes 
toward educated women  
(D) Refute the argument that the French salons had little influence over the 
direction the English salons took  
(E) Explain the differences in atmosphere and style in their salons  
20. Which of the following statements is most compatible with the principles of the 
salonnieres  as described in the passage?  
(A) Women should aspire to be not only educated but indepen dent as well.  
(B) The duty of the educated women is to provide an active political model for 
less educated women.  
(C) Devotion to pleasure and art is justified in itself.  
(D) Substance, rather than form, is the most important consideration in holding a 
literary salon.  
(E) Men should be excluded from groups of womens rights supporters.  
21. The passage suggests that the Bluestockings might have had a more significant 378 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 impact on society if it had not been for which of the following?  
(A) Competitiveness among their salo ns 
(B) Their emphasis on individualism  
(C) The limited scope of their activities  
(D) Their acceptance of the French salon as a model for their own salons  
(E) Their unwillingness to defy aggressively the conventions of their age  
22. Which of the followin g could best be considered a twentieth -century counterpart 
of an eighteenth century literary salon as it is described in the passage?  
(A) A social sorority  
(B) A community center  
(C) A lecture course on art  
(D) A humanities study group  
(E) An associatio n of moral reformers  
23. To an assertion that Bluestockings were feminists, the author would most 
probably respond with which of the following?  
(A) Admitted uncertainty  
(B) Qualified disagreement  
(C) Unquestioning approval  
(D) Complete indifference  
(E) Strong disparagement  
24. Which of the following titles best describes the content of the passage?  
(A) Eighteenth -Century Egalitarianism  
(B) Feminists of the Eighteenth Century  
(C) Eighteenth -Century Precursors of Feminism  
(D) Intellectual Life in the Eight eenth Century  
(E) Female Education Reform in the Eighteenth Century  
When the same parameters and quantitative theory are used to analyze both termite 
colonies and troops of rhesus macaques, we will have a unified science of sociobiology. Can this 
ever really happen?  As my own studies have advanced, I have been increasingly impressed with 
the functional similarities between insect and vertebrate societies and less so with the structural 
differences that seem, at first glance , to constitute such a n immense gulf between them. 
Consider for a moment  termites and macaques. Both form cooperative groups that occupy 
territories. In both kinds of society there is a well -marked division of labor . Member s of both 
groups communicate to each other hunger, alarm, hostility, caste status or rank, and 
reproductive status. From the specialists point of view, this comparison may at first seem 
facileor worse. But it is out of such deliberate oversimplification that the beginnings of a 
general theory are made.  
25. Which of the following best summarizes the authors main point?   GRE  379 
 (A) Oversimplified comparisons of animal societies could diminish the likelihood 
of developing a unified science of sociobiology.  
(B) Unde rstanding the ways in which animals as different as termites and rhesus 
macaques resemble each other requires train in both biology and sociology.  
(C) Most animals organize themselves into societies that exhibit patterns of group 
behavior similar to those of human societies.  
(D) Animals as different as termites and rhesus macaques follow certain similar 
and predictable patterns of behavior.  
(E) A study of the similarities between insect and vertebrate societies could 
provide the basis for a unified science of sociobiology.  
26. The authors attitude toward the possibility of a unified theory in sociobiology is 
best described as which of th e following?  
(A) Guarded optimism  
(B) Unqualified enthusiasm  
(C) Objective indifference  
(D) Resignation  
(E) Dissatisfaction  
27. In discussing insect and vertebrate societies, the author suggests which of the 
following?  
(A) A distinguishing characteristi c of most insect and vertebrate societies is a 
well-marked division of labor.  
(B) The caste structure of insect societies is similar to that of vertebrate societies.  
(C) Most insect and vertebrate societies form cooperative groups in order to 
occupy territ ory. 
(D) The means of communication among members of insect societies is similar to 
that among members of vertebrate societies.  
(E) There are significant structural differences between insect and vertebrate 
societies.  
No. 6 -1 
SECTION A  
A mysterious phenomenon is the ability of over -water migrants to travel on course. Birds, 
bees, and other species can keep track of  time without any sensory cues from the outside world, 
and such biological clocks  clearly contribute to their compass sense.  For example, they can 
use the position of the Sun or stars, along with the time of day , to fin d north. But compass 
sense alone cannot explain how birds navigate the ocean: after a flock traveling east is blown 
far south by a storm, it will assume the proper northeasterly course to compensate. Perhaps, 
some scientists thought, migrants determine the ir geographic position on Earth by celestial 380 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 navigation, almost as human navigators use stars and planets, but this would demand of  the 
animals a fantastic map sense. Researchers now know that some species have a magnetic 
sense, which might allow migrants to determine their geographic location by detecting 
variations in the strength of the Earth s magnetic field.  
17. The main idea of the passage is that  
(A) migration over land requires a simpler explanation than migration over water 
does 
(B) the means by which animals migrate over water are complex and only partly 
understood  
(C) the ability of migrant animals to keep track of time i s related to their magnetic 
sense  
(D) knowledge of geographic location is essential to migrants with little or no 
compass sense  
(E) explanations of how animals migrate tend to replace, rather than build on, one 
another  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that if the flock of birds described in lines 
8-12 were navigating by compass sense alone, they would, after  the storm, f ly 
(A) east  
(B) north  
(C) northwest  
(D) south  
(E) southeast  
19. In maintaining that migrating animals would need a fantastic map sense  (line 
17) to determine their geographic position by celestial navigation, the author 
intends to express  
(A) admirati on for the ability of the migrants  
(B) skepticism about celestial navigation as an explanation  
(C) certainly that the phenomenon of migration will remain mysterious  
(D) interest in a new method of accounting for over -water migration  
(E) surprise that an imals apparently navigate in much the same way that human 
beings do  
20. Of the following descriptions of migrating animals, which most strongly suggests 
that the animals are depending on magnetic cues to orient  themselves?  
(A) Pigeons can properly readjust  their course even when flying long distances 
through exceedingly dense fogs.  
(B) Bison are able to reach their destination by passing through a landscape that 
has been partially altered by a recent fire.  
(C) Elephants are able to find grounds that some me mbers of the herd have never 
seen before.   GRE  381 
 (D) Swallows are able to return to a given spot at the same time every year.  
(E) Monarch butterflies coming from different parts of North America are able to 
arrive  at the same location each winter.  
Roger Rosenb latts book Black Fiction , in attempting to apply literary rather than 
sociopolitical criteria to its subject, successfully alters the approach taken by most previous 
studies. As Rosenblatt notes, criticism of Black writing has often served as a pretext fo r 
expounding on Black history. Addison Gayle s recent work, for example, judges the value of 
Black fiction by overtly political standards, rating each work according to the notions of Black 
identity which it propounds.  
Although fiction assuredly springs fr om political circumstances, its authors react to those 
circumstances in ways other than ideological, and talking about novels and stories primarily as 
instruments of ideology circumvents much of the fictional enterprise. Rosenblatt s literary 
analysis disc loses affinities and  connections among works of Black fiction which solely political 
studies have overlooked or ignored.  
Writing acceptable criticism of Black fiction,  however, presupposes giving satisfactory 
answers to a number of questions. First of all,  is there a sufficient reason, other than the racial 
identity of the authors, to group together works by Black authors? Second, how does Black 
fiction make itself distinct from other modern fiction with which it is largely contemporaneous? 
Rosenblatt shows  that Black fiction constitutes a distinct body of writing that has an identifiable,  
coherent literary tradition. Looking at novels written by Blacks over the last eighty years, he 
discovers  recurring concerns and designs independent of chronology. These s tructures are 
thematic, and they spring, not surprisingly, from the central fact that the Black characters in 
these novels exist in a predominantly White culture, whether they try to conform to that culture 
of rebel against  it. 
Black Fiction  does leave some aesthetic questions open. Rosenblatt s thematic analysis 
permits considerable objectivity; he even explicitly states that it is not his intention to judge the 
merit of the various works yet his reluctance seems misplaced, especially  since an attempt to 
appraise might have led to interesting results. For instance, some of the novels appear to be 
structurally diffuse. Is this a defect, or are the authors working out of, or trying to forge, a 
different kind of  aesthetic? In addition, th e style of some Black novels, like Jean Toomers Cane, 
verges on  expressionism or surrealism; does this technique provide a counterpoint  to the 
prevalent theme that p ortrays the fate against which Black heroes are pitted, a theme usually 
conveyed by more naturalistic modes of expression?  
In spite of such omissions, what Rosenblatt does include in his discussion makes for an 
astute and worthwhile study. Black Fiction  surveys a wide variety of novels, bringing to our 
attention in the process some fascinating and little -known works like James Weldon Johnsons 
Autobiography of an Ex -Colored Man . Its argument is tightly constructed, and its forthright, 
lucid style exemplifie s levelheaded and penetrating criticism.  
21. The author of the passage objects to criticism of Black fiction like that by 
Addison Gayle because it  
(A) emphasizes purely literary aspects of such fiction  
(B) misinterprets the ideological content of such fict ion 382 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) misunderstands the notions of Black identity contained in such fiction  
(D) substitutes political for literary criteria in evaluating such fiction  
(E) ignores the interplay between Black history and Black identity displayed in 
such fiction  
22. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) evaluating the soundness of a work of criticism  
(B) comparing various critical approaches to a su bject  
(C) discussing the limitations of a particular kind of criticism  
(D) summarizing the major points made in a work of criticism  
(E) explaining the theoretical background of a certain kind of criticism  
23. The author of the passage believes that Black Fiction  would have been improved 
had Rosenblatt  
(A) evaluated more carefully the ideological and historical aspects of Black 
fiction  
(B) attempted to be more objective in his approach to novels and stories by Black 
authors  
(C) explored in greater detail the recurrent thematic concerns of Black fiction 
throughout its history  
(D) established a basis for placing Black fiction within its own unique literary 
tradition  
(E) assessed the relative literary merit of the novels he analyzes thematically  
24. The authors discussion of Black Fiction  can be best described as  
(A) pedantic and contentious  
(B) critical but admiring  
(C) ironic and deprecating  
(D) argumentative bu t unfocused  
(E) stilted and insincere  
25. It can be inferred that the author of the passage would be LEAST likely to 
approve of which of the following?  
(A) An analysis of the influence of political events on the personal ideology of 
Black writes  
(B) A critical study that applies sociopolitical criteria to autobiographies by Black 
authors  
(C) A literary study of Black poetry that appraises the merits of poems according 
to the political acceptability of their themes  
(D) An examination of the growth of a di stinct Black literary tradition within the 
context of Black history  
(E) A literary study that attempts to isolate aesthetic qualities unique to Black  GRE  383 
 fiction  
26. The author of the passage uses all of the following in the discussion of 
Rosenblatts book EXCEPT  
(A) rhetorical questions  
(B) specific examples  
(C) compariso n and contrast  
(D) definition of terms  
(E) personal opinion  
27. The author of the passage refers to James Weldon Johnsons Autobiography of an 
Ex-Colored Man  most probably in order to  
(A) point out affinities between Rosenblatts method of thematic anal ysis and 
earlier criticism  
(B) clarify the point about expressionistic style made earlier in the passage  
(C) qualify the assessment of Rosenblatts book made in the first paragraph of the 
passage  
(D) illustrate the affinities among Black novels disclosed b y Rosenblatts literary 
analysis  
(E) give a specific example of one of the accomplishments of Rosenblatts work  
SECTION B 
The molecules of carbon dioxide in the Earth s atmosphere affect the heat balance of the 
Earth by acting as a one -way screen. Although these molecules allow radiat ion at visible 
wavelengths, where most of the energy of sunlight is concentrated, to pass through, they 
absorb some of the longer -wavelength, infrared emissions radiated from the Earth s surface, 
radiation that would otherwise be transmitted back into spac e. For the Earth to maintain a 
constant average temperature, such emissions from the planet must balance incoming solar 
radiation. If there were no carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, heat would escape from the Earth 
much more easily. The surface  temper ature would be so much lower that the oceans might be 
a solid mass  of ice.  
Today, however, the potential problem is too much carbon dioxide. The burning of fossil 
fuels and the clearing of forests have increased atmospheric carbon dioxide by ab out 15 
percent in the last hundred years, and we continue to add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. 
Could the increase in carbon dioxide cause a global rise in average temperature, and could such 
a rise have serious consequences for human society? Mathemati cal models that allow us to 
calculate the rise in temperature as a function of the increase indicate that the answer is 
probably yes.  
Under present conditions a temperature of -18 can be observed at an altitude of 5 to 6 
kilometers above the Earth. Below this altitude (called the radiating level), the temperature 
increases by about 6  per kilometer approaching the Earth s surface, where the average 
temperature is about 15 . An inc rease in the amount of carbon dioxide means that there are 384 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 more molecules of carbon dioxide to absorb infrared radiation. As the capacity of the 
atmosphere to absorb infrared radiation increases, the radiating level and the temperature of 
the surface must rise. 
One mathematical model predicts that doubling the atmospheric carbon dioxide would 
raise the global mean surface temperature by 2.5 . This model assumes that the atmosphere s 
relative humidity  remains constant and the temperature decreases with altitude at a rate of 
6.5 per kilometer. The assump tion of constant relative humidity is important, because water  
vapor in the atmosphere is another efficient absorber of radiation at infrared wavelengths. 
Because warm air can hold more moisture than cool air, the relative humidity will be constant 
only if the amount of water vapor in the atmosphere increases as the temperature rises. 
Therefore, more infrared radiation would be absorbed and reradiated  back to the Earth s 
surface. The resultant warming at the surface could be expected to melt snow and ice, reducing 
the Earth s reflectivity. More solar radiation would t hen be absorbed, leading to a further 
increase in temperature.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) warn of the dangers of continued burning of fossil fuels  
(B) discuss the significance of increasing the amount of carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphe re 
(C) explain how a constant temperature is maintained on the Earth s surface  
(D) describe the ways in which various atmospheric and climatic conditions 
contribute to the Earth s weather  
(E) demonstrate the usefulness of mathematical models in predicting long -range 
climatic change  
18. According to the passage, the greatest part of the solar energy that reaches the 
Earth is  
(A) concentrated in the infrared spectrum  
(B) concentrated at v isible wavelengths  
(C) absorbed by carbon dioxide molecules  
(D) absorbed by atmospheric water vapor  
(E) reflected back to space by snow and ice  
19. According to the passage, atmospheric carbon dioxide performs all of the 
following functions EXCEPT:  
(A) absorbing radiation at visible wavelengths  
(B) absorbing infrared radiation  
(C) absorbing outgoing radiation from the Earth  
(D) helping to retain heat near the Earth s surface  
(E) helping to maintain a constant average temperature on the Earth s surface  
20. Which of the following best describes the author s attitude toward the increasing 
amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and its consequences?   GRE  385 
 (A) Incredulous  
(B) Completely detached  
(C) Interested but skeptical  
(D) Angry yet resigned  
(E) Objec tive yet concerned  
21. It can be concluded from information contained in the passage that the average 
temperature at an altitude of 1 kilometer above the Earth is about  
(A) 15 
(B) 9 
(C) 2.5 
(D) -12 
(E) -18 
22. It can be inferred from the passage th at the construction of the mathematical 
model mentioned in the passage involved the formulation of which of the 
following?  
(A) An assumption that the amount of carbon dioxide added to the atmosphere 
would in reality steadily increase  
(B) An assumption that  human activities are the only agencies by which carbon 
dioxide is added to the atmosphere  
(C) Assumptions about the social and political consequences of any curtailment 
of the use of fossil fuels  
(D) Assumptions about the physical conditions that are like ly to prevail during the 
period for which the model was made  
(E) Assumptions about the differential behavior of carbon dioxide molecules at 
the various levels of temperature calculated in the model  
23. According to the passage, which of the following is  true of the last hundred 
years?  
(A) Fossil fuels were burned for the first time.  
(B) Greater amounts of land were cleared than at any time before.  
(C) The average temperature at the Earth s surface has become 2  cooler.  
(D) The amount of carbon dioxide in  the atmosphere has increased measurably.  
(E) The amount of farmland worldwide has doubled.  
Some modern anthropologists hold that biological evolution has shaped not only human 
morphology but also human behavior. The role those anthropologists ascribe t o evolution is not 
of dictating the details of human behavior but one of imposing constraints ways of feeling, 
thinking, and acting that come naturally in archetypal situations in any culture. Our 
frailties emotions and motives such as rage, fear,  greed, gluttony, joy, lust, love may be a 
very mixed assortment, but they share at least one immediate quality: we are, as we say, in 
the grip  of them. And thus they give us our sense of constraints.  386 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Unhappily, some of those frailties our need for ever -increasing security among them are 
presently maladaptive. Yet beneath the overlay of cultural detail, they, too, are said to be 
biological in direction, and therefore as natural to us as are our appendixes.  We would need to 
comprehend thoroughly their adaptive origins in order to understand how badly they guide us 
now. And we might then begin to resist their  pressure.  
24. The primary purpose of the passage is to present  
(A) a position on the foundations of human behavior and on what those 
foundations imply  
(B) a  theory outlining the parallel development of human morphology and of 
human behavior  
(C) a diagnostic test for separating biologically determined behavior patterns 
from culture -specific detail  
(D) a practical method for resisting the pressures of biologica lly determined 
drives  
(E) an overview of those human emotions and motives that impose constraints on 
human behavior  
25. The author implies that control to any extent over the frailties  that constrain our 
behavior is  thought to presuppose  
(A) that those frailties are recog nized as currently beneficial and adaptive  
(B) that there is little or no overlay of cultural detail that masks their true nature  
(C) that there are cultures in which those frailties do not come naturally  and 
from which such control can be learned  
(D) a full understanding of why those frailties evolved and of how they function 
now 
(E) a thorough grasp of the principle that cultural detail in human behavior can 
differ arbitrarily from society to society  
26. Which of the following most probably provides an appropriate analogy from 
human morphology for the details  versus constra ints distinction made in the 
passage in relation to  human behavior?  
(A) The ability of most people to see all the colors of the visible spectrum as 
against most people s inability to name any but the primary colors  
(B) T he ability of even the least fortunate people to show compassion as against 
people s inability to mask their feelings completely  
(C) The ability of some people to dive to great depths as against most people s 
inability to  swim long distances  
(D) The psycho logical profile of those people who are able to delay gratification 
as against people s inability to control their lives completely  
(E) The greater lung capacity of mountain peoples that helps them live in 
oxygen -poor air as against people s inability to fly without special apparatus   GRE  387 
 27. It can be inferred that in his discussion of maladaptive frailties the author assumes 
that 
(A) evolution does not favor the emergence of adaptive characteristics over the 
emergence of maladaptive ones  
(B) any structure or behavior not positively adaptive is regarded as transitory in 
evolutionary theory  
(C) maladaptive characteristics, once fixed, ma ke the emergence of other 
maladaptive characteristics more likely  
(D) the designation of a characteristic as being maladaptive must always remain 
highly tentative  
(E) changes in the total human environment can outpace evolutionary change  
No. 6 -2 
SECTION A  
Whether the languages of the ancient American peoples were used for expressing abstract 
universal concepts can be clearly answered in the case of Nahuatl. Nahu atl, like Greek and 
German, is a language that allows the formation of extensive compounds. By the combination 
of radicals or semantic elements, single compound words can express complex conceptual 
relations, often of an abstract universal character.  
The tlamatinime  (those who know ) were able to use this rich stock of abstract terms to 
express the nuances of their thought. They also availed themselves of other forms of 
expression with metaphorical meaning, some probably original, some derived from Toltec 
coinages. Of these forms the most characteristic in Nahuatl is the juxtaposition of two words 
that, because they are synonyms, associated terms, or even contraries, complement each other 
to evoke one single idea. Used as metaphor, the juxtaposed terms conn ote specific or essential 
traits of the being they refer to, introducing a mode of poetry as an almost habitual form of 
expression.  
17. A main purpose of the passage is to  
(A) delineate the function of the tlamatinime  in Nahuatl society  
(B) explain the abs tract philosophy of the Nahuatl thinkers  
(C) argue against a theory of poetic expression by citing evidence about the 
Nahuatl  
(D) explore the rich metaphorical heritage the Nahuatl received from the Toltecs  
(E) describe some conceptual and aesthetic res ources of the Nahuatl language  
18. According to the passage, some abstract universal ideas can be expressed in 
Nahuatl by  
(A) taking away from a word any reference to particular instances  
(B) removing a word from its associations with other words  388 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) givin g a word a new and opposite meaning  
(D) putting various meaningful elements together in one word  
(E) turning each word of a phrase into a poetic metaphor  
19. It can be inferred solely from the information in the passage that  
(A) there are many languages that, like Greek or German, allow extensive 
compounding  
(B) all abstract universal ideas are id eas of complex relations  
(C) some record or evidence of the thought of the tlamatinime  exists  
(D) metaphors are always used in Nahuatl to express abstract conceptual 
relationships  
(E) the abstract terms of the Nahuatl language are habitually used in poe try 
Many theories have been formulated to explain the role of grazers such as zooplankton in 
controlling the amount of planktonic algae (phytoplankton) in lakes. The first theories of such 
grazer control were merely based on observations of negative correl ations between algal and 
zooplankton numbers. A low number of algal cells in the presence of a high number of grazers 
suggested, but did not prove, that the grazers had removed most of the algae. The converse 
observation, of the absence of grazers in areas  of high phytoplankton concentration, led Hardy 
to propose his principle of animal exclusion, which hypothesized that phytoplankton produced a 
repellent that excluded grazers from regions of high phytoplankton concentration. This was the 
first suggestion o f algal defenses against grazing.  
Perhaps the fact that many of these first studies considered only algae of a size that could 
be collected in a net (net phytoplankton), a practice that overlooked the smaller phytoplankton 
(nannoplankton) that we now know grazers are most likely to feed on, led to a de -emphasis of 
the role of grazers in subsequent research. Increasingly, as in the individual studies of Lund, 
Round, and Reynolds, researchers began to stress the importance of environmental factors 
such as tem perature, light, and water movements in controlling algal numbers. These 
environmental factors were amenable to field monitoring and to simulation in the laboratory. 
Grazing was believed to have some effect on algal numbers, especially after phytoplankton 
growth rates declined at the end of bloom periods, but grazing was considered a minor 
component of models that predicted algal population dynamics . 
The potential magnitude of grazing pressure on freshwater phytoplankton has  only 
recently been determined empirically. Studies by Hargrave and Geen estimated natural 
community grazing rates by measuring feeding rates of individual zooplankton species in the 
laboratory and then computing community grazing rates for field condition s using the known 
population density of grazers. The high estimates of grazing pressure postulated by these 
researchers were not fully accepted, however, until the grazing rates of zooplankton were 
determined directly in the field, by means of new experime ntal techniques. Using a specially 
prepared feeding chamber, Haney was able to record zooplankton grazing rates in natural field 
conditions. In the periods of peak zooplankton abundance, that is, in the late spring and in the 
summer, Haney recorded maximum  daily community grazing rates, for nutrient -poor lakes and 
bog lakes, respectively, of 6.6 percent and 114 percent of daily phytoplankton production. 
Cladocerans had higher grazing rates than copepods, usually accounting for 80 percent of the  GRE  389 
 community gr azing rate. These rates varied seasonally, reaching the lowest point in the winter 
and early spring. Haney s thorough research provides convincing field evidence that grazers can 
exert significant pressure on phytoplankton population.  
20. The author most l ikely mentions Hardy s principle of animal exclusion in order to  
(A) give an example of one theory about the interaction of grazers and 
phytoplankton  
(B) defend the first theory of algal defenses against grazing  
(C) support the contention that phytoplankto n numbers are controlled primarily 
by environmental factors  
(D) demonstrate the superiority of laboratory studies of zooplankton feeding rates 
to other kinds of studies of such rates  
(E) refute researchers who believed that low numbers of phytoplankton indicated 
the grazing effect of low numbers of zooplankton  
21. It can be inferred from the passage that the first theories  of grazer control 
mentioned in line 4 would have been more convincing if researchers had been 
able to  
(A) observe high phytoplankto n numbers under natural lake conditions  
(B) discover negative correlations between algae and zooplankton numbers from 
their field research  
(C) understand the central importance of environmental factors in controlling the 
growth rates of phytoplankton  
(D) m ake verifiable correlations of cause and effect between zooplankton and 
phytoplankton numbers  
(E) invent laboratory techniques that would have allowed them to bypass their 
field research concerning grazer control  
22. Which of the following, if true, wou ld call into question Hardy s principle of 
animal exclusion?  
(A) Zooplankton are not the only organisms that are affected by phytoplankton 
repellents.  
(B) Zooplankton exclusion is unrelated to phytoplankton population density.  
(C) Zooplankton population de nsity is higher during some parts of the year than 
during others.  
(D) Net phytoplankton are more likely to exclude zooplankton than are 
nannoplankton.  
(E) Phytoplankton numbers can be strongly affected by environmental factors.  
23. The author would be likely to agree with which of the following statements 
regarding the pressure of grazers on phytoplankton numbers?  
I. Grazing pressure can vary accordi ng to the individual type of zooplankton.  
II. Grazing pressure can be lower in nutrient -poor lakes than in bog lakes.  390 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 III. Grazing tends to exert about the same pressure as does temperature.  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
24. The passage supplies information to indicate that Hargrave and Geen s 
conclusion regarding the grazing pressure exerted by zooplankton on 
phytoplankton numbers was most similar to the conclusion regarding grazing 
pressure reached by which of the following researchers?  
(A) Hardy  
(B) Lund  
(C) Round  
(D) Reynolds  
(E) Haney  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that one way in which many of the early 
researchers on grazer control could have improved their data would have been to  
(A) emphasize the effects of temperature, rather than of light, on phytoplankton  
(B) disregard nannoplankton in their analysis of phytoplankton numbers  
(C) collect phytoplankton of all sizes before analyzing the extent of 
phytoplankton concentration  
(D) recognize that phytoplankton other than net phytoplankton could be collected 
in a ne t 
(E) understand the crucial significance of net phytoplankton in the diet of 
zooplankton  
26. According to the passage, Hargrave and Geen did which of the following in their 
experiments?  
(A) They compared the grazing rates of individual zooplankton speci es in the 
laboratory with the natural grazing rates of these species.  
(B) The hypothesized about the population density of grazers in natural habitats 
by using data concerning the population density of grazers in the laboratory.  
(C) They estimated the comm unity grazing rates of zooplankton in the laboratory 
by using data concerning the natural community grazi ng rates of 
zooplankton.  
(D) They estimated the natural community grazing rates of zooplankton by using 
data concerning the known population density of  phytoplankton.  
(E) They estimated the natural community grazing rates of zooplankton by using 
laboratory data concerning the grazing rates of individual zooplankton 
species.   GRE  391 
 27. Which of the following is a true statement about the zooplankton numbers a nd 
zooplankton grazing rates observed in Haney s experiments?  
(A) While zooplankton numbers began to decline in August, zooplankton grazing 
rates began to increase.  
(B) Although zooplankton numbers were high in May, grazing rates did not 
become high until January.  
(C) Both zooplankton numbers and grazing rates were higher in December than in 
November.  
(D) Both zooplankton numbers and grazing rates were lower in March than in 
June.  
(E) Both zooplankton numbers and grazing rates were highest in February.  
SECTION B 
Hydrogeology is a science dealing with the properties, distribution, and circulation of water 
on the surface of the land, in the soil and underlying rocks, and in the at mosphere. The 
hydrologic cycle, a major topic in this science, is the complete cycle of phenomena through 
which water passes, beginning as atmospheric water vapor, passing into liquid and solid form as 
precipitation, thence along and into the ground surfac e, and finally again returning to the form 
of atmospheric water vapor by means of evaporation and transpiration.  
The term geohydrology is sometimes erroneously used as a synonym for hydrogeology. 
Geohydrology is concerned with underground water. There are many formations that contain 
water but are not part of the hydrologic cycle because of geologic changes that have isolated 
them underground. These systems are properly termed geohydrologic but not hydrogeologic. 
Only when a system possesses natural or artificial boundaries that associate the water within it 
with the hydrologic cycle may the entire system properly be termed hydrogeologic.  
17. The authors primary purpose is most probably to  
(A) present a hypothesis  
(B) refute an argument  
(C) correct a mi sconception  
(D) predict an occurrence  
(E) describe an enigma  
18. It can be inferred that which of the following is most likely to be the subject of 
study by a geohydrologist?  
(A) Soft, porous rock being worn away by a waterfall  
(B) Water depositing mine rals on the banks of a gorge through which the water 
runs 
(C) The trapping of water in a sealed underground rock cavern through the action 
of an earthquake  
(D) Water becoming unfit to drink through the release of pollutants into it from a 
manufacturing pla nt 392 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) The changing course of a river channel as the action of the water wears away 
the rocks past which the river flows  
19. The author refers to many formations (line 16) primarily in order to  
(A) clarify a distinction  
(B) introduce a subject  
(C) draw an analogy  
(D) emphasize a similarity  
(E) resolve a conflict  
The historian Frederick J. Turner wrote in the 1890s that the agrarian discontent that had 
been developing steadily in the United States since about 1870 had been precipitated by the 
closing of the internal frontier that is, the depletion of available new land needed for further 
expansion of the American farming system. Not only was Turners thesis influential at the time, 
it was later adopted and elaborated by other scholars, such as John D. Hicks in The Populist 
Revolt  (1931). Actually, however, new lands were taken up for farming in the United States 
throughout and beyond the nineteenth century. In the 1890s, when agrarian discontent had 
become most acute, 1,100,000 new farms were settled, which was 500,000 more than had 
been settled during the previous decade. After 1890, under the terms of the Homestead Act 
and its successors, more new land was taken up for farming than had been taken up for this 
purpose in the United States up until that time. It is true that a high proportion of the newly 
farmed land was suitable only for grazing and dry farming, but agricultural practices had 
become sufficiently advanced to make it possible to increase the profitability of farming by 
utilizing even these  relatively barren lands.  
The emphasis given by both scholars and statesmen to the presumed disappearance of the 
American frontier helped to obscure the great importance of changes in the conditions and 
consequences of international trade that occurred dur ing the second half of the nineteenth 
century. In 1869 the Suez Canal was opened and the first transcontinental railroad in the United 
States was completed. An extensive network of telegraph and telephone communications was 
spun: Europe was connected by su bmarine cable with the United States in 1866 and with South 
America in 1874. By about 1870 improvements in agricultural technology made possible the full 
exploitation of areas that were most suitable for extensive farming  on a mec hanized basis. 
Huge tracts of land were being settled and farmed in Argentina, Australia, Canada, and in the 
American West, and these areas were joined with one another and with the countries of Europe 
into an interdependent market system. As a consequence , agrarian depressions no longer were 
local or national in scope, and they struck several nations whose internal frontiers had not 
vanished or were not about to vanish. Between the early 1870 s and the 1890 s, the mounting 
agrarian discontent in America pa ralleled the almost uninterrupted decline in the prices of 
American agricultural products on foreign markets. Those staple -growing farmers in the United 
States who exhibited the greatest discontent were those who had become most dependent on 
foreign market s for the sale of their products. Insofar as  Americans had been deterred from 
taking up new land for farming, it was because market conditions had made this period a 
perilous time in which to do so.  
20. The author is primaril y concerned with   GRE  393 
 (A) showing that a certain interpretation is better supported by the evidence than 
is an alternative explanation  
(B) developing an alternative interpretation by using sources of evidence that 
formerly had been unavailable  
(C) questioning t he accuracy of the evidence that most scholars have used to 
counter the author s own interpretation  
(D) reviewing the evidence that formerly had been thought to obscure a valid 
interpretation  
(E) presenting evidence in support of a controversial version of an earlier  
interpretation  
21. According to the author, changes in the conditions of international trade resulted 
in an  
(A) underestimation of the amount of new land that was being famed i n the 
United States  
(B) underutilization of relatively small but rich plots of land  
(C) overexpansion of the world transportation network for shipping agricultural 
products  
(D) extension of agrarian depressions beyond national boundaries  
(E) emphasis on  the importance of market forces in determining the prices of 
agricultural products  
22. The author implies that the change in the state of the American farmer s morale 
during the latter part of the nineteenth century was traceable to the American 
farmer s increasing perception that the  
(A) costs of cultivating the land were prohibitive within the United States  
(B) development of the first transcontinental railroad in the United States 
occurred at the expense of the American farmer  
(C) American farming syste m was about to run out of the new farmland that was 
required for its expansion  
(D) prices of American agricultural products were deteriorating especially rapidly 
on domestic markets  
(E) proceeds from the sales of American agricultural products on foreig n markets 
were unsatisfactory  
23. According to the passage, which of the following occurred prior to 1890?  
(A) Frederick J. Turner s thesis regarding the American frontier became 
influential.  
(B) The Homestead Act led to an increase in the amount of newly farmed land in 
the United States.  
(C) The manufacturers of technologically advanced agricultural machinery 
rapidly increased their marketing efforts.  394 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) Direct lines of communication were constructed between the United States 
and South America.  
(E) Technological advances made it fruitful to farm extensively on a mechanized 
basis.  
24. The author implies that, after certain territories and countries had been joined into 
an interdependent market system in the nineteenth century, agrarian depress ions 
within that system  
(A) spread to several nations, excluding those in which the internal frontier 
remained open  
(B) manifested themselves in several nations, including those in which new land 
remained available for farming  
(C) slowed down the pace of n ew technological developments in international 
communications and transportation  
(D) affected the local and national prices of the nonagricultural products of 
several nations  
(E) encouraged several nations to sell more of their agricultural products on 
foreign markets  
25. The author provides information concerning newly farmed lands in the United 
States (lines 11 -27) as evidence in direct support of which of the following?  
(A) A proposal by Frederick J. Turner that was later disputed by John D. Hicks  
(B) An elaboration by John D. Hicks of a thesis that formerly had been 
questioned by Frederick J. Turner  
(C) The established view that was disputed by those scholars who adopted  the 
thesis of Frederick J. Turner  
(D) The thesis that important changes occurred in the nature of international trade 
during the second half of the nineteenth century  
(E) The view that the American frontier did not become closed during the 
nineteenth century or soon thereafter  
26. The author implies that the cause of the agrarian discontent was  
(A) masked by the vagueness of the official records on newly settled far ms 
(B) overshadowed by disputes on the reliability of the existing historical evidence  
(C) misidentified as a result of influential but erroneous theorizing  
(D) overlooked because of a preoccupation with market conditions  
(E) undetected because visible indications of the cause occurred so gradually and 
sporadically  
27. The author s argument implies that, compared to the yearly price changes that 
actually occurred on foreign agricultural markets during the 1880 s, American 
farmers would have most preferre d yearly price changes that were  
(A) much smaller and in the same direction   GRE  395 
 (B) much smaller but in the opposite direction  
(C) slightly smaller and in the same direction  
(D) similar in size but in the opposite direction  
(E) slightly greater and in the same direction  
No. 6 -3 
SECTION A  
The use of heat pumps has been held back largely by skepticism about advertisers  claims 
that heat pumps can provide as many as two units of thermal energy for each unit of electrical 
energy used, thus apparently contradicting the principle of energy conservation . Heat pumps 
circulate a fluid refrigerant that cycles alternatively from its liquid phase to its vapor phase in a 
closed loop . The refrigerant, starting as a low -temperature, low -pressure vapor, enters a 
compressor driven by an electric motor. The refrigerant leaves the compressor as a hot, dense 
vapor and flows through a heat exchanger called the condenser, which transfers  heat from the 
refrigerant to a body of air. Now the refrigerant, as a high -pressure, cooled liquid, confronts a 
flow restriction which causes the pressure to drop. As the pressure falls, the refrigerant expands 
and partially vaporizes, becoming chilled. I t then passes through a second heat exchanger, the 
evaporator, which transfers heat from the air to the refrigerant, reducing the temperature of 
this second body of air. Of the two heat exchangers, one is located inside, and the other one 
outside the house , so each is in contact with a different body of air: room air and outside air, 
respectively.  
The flow direction of refrigerant through a heat pump is controlled by valves. When the 
refrigerant flow is reversed, the heat exchangers switch function. This fl ow-reversal capability 
allows heat pumps either to heat or cool room air. Now, if under certain conditions a heat pump 
puts out more thermal energy than it consumes in electrical energy, has the law of energy 
conservation been challenged? No, not even remo tely: the additional input of thermal energy 
into the circulating refrigerant via the evaporator accounts for the difference in the energy 
equation.  
Unfortunately, there is one real problem. The heating capacity of a heat pump decreases as 
the outdoor temp erature falls. The drop in capacity is caused by the lessening amount of 
refrigerant mass moved through the compressor at one time. The heating capacity is 
proportional to this mass flow rate: the less the mass of refrigerant being compressed, the less 
the thermal load it can transfer through the heat -pump cycle. The volume flow rate of 
refrigerant vapor through the single -speed rotary compressor used in heat pumps is 
approximately constant. But cold refrigerant vapor entering a compressor is at lower press ure 
than warmer vapor. Therefore, the mass of cold refrigerant and thus the thermal energy it 
carries is less than if the refrigerant vapor were warmer before compression.  
Here, then, lies a genuine drawback of heat pumps: in extremely cold climates where the 
most heat is needed heat pumps are least able to supply enough heat.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  396 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) explain the differences in the working of a heat  pump when the outdoor 
temperature changes  
(B) contrast the heating and the cooling mo des of heat pumps  
(C) describe heat pumps, their use, and factors affecting their use  
(D) advocate the more widespread use of heat pumps  
(E) expose extravagant claims about heat pumps as false  
18. The author resolves the question of whether heat pumps run counter to the 
principle of energy conservation by  
(A) carefully qualifying the meaning of that principle  
(B) pointing out a factual error in the statement that gives rise to this question  
(C) supplying additional relevant facts  
(D) denying the relevance of that principle to heat pumps  
(E) explaining that heat pumps can cool, as well as heat, room air  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that, in the course of a heating season, the 
heating capacity of a heat pump is greatest when  
(A) heating is least essential  
(B) electricity rates are lowest  
(C) its compressor runs the fastest  
(D) outdoor temperatures hold steady  
(E) the heatin g demand surges  
20. If the author s assessment of the use of heat pumps  (lines 1 -6) is correct, which of 
the following best  expresses the lesson that advertisers should learn  from this 
case?  
(A) Do not make exaggerated claims about the products you are try ing to 
promote.  
(B) Focus your advertising campaign on vague analogies and veiled implications 
instead of on facts.  
(C) Do not use facts in your advertising that will  strain the prospective client s 
ability to  believe.  
(D) Do not assume in your advertising  that the prospective clients know even the 
most elementary scientific principles.  
(E) Concentrate your advertising firmly on financially relevant issues such as 
price discounts  and efficiency of operation.  
21. The passage suggests that heat pumps would  be used more widely if  
(A) they could also be used as air conditioners  
(B) they could be moved around to supply heat where it is most needed  
(C) their heat output could be thermostatically controlled  
(D) models with truly superior cooling capacity were ad vertised more effectively   GRE  397 
 (E) people appreciated the role of the evaporator in  the energy equation  
22. According to the passage, the role of the flow restriction (lines 16 -17) in a heat 
pump is to  
(A) measure accurately the flow rate of the refrigerant mass at that point  
(B) co mpress and heat the refrigerant vapor  
(C) bring about the evaporation and cooling of refrigerant  
(D) exchange heat between the refrigerant and the  air at that point  
(E) reverse the direction of refrigerant flow when  needed  
23. The author regards the not ion that heat pumps have  a genuine drawback as a  
(A) cause for regret  
(B) sign of premature defeatism  
(C) welcome challenge  
(D) case of sloppy thinking  
(E) focus for an educational campaign  
All of Francoise Duparc s surviving paintings blend portraiture  and genre. Her subjects 
appear to be acquaintances whom she has asked to pose; she has captured both their 
self-consciousness and the spontaneity of their everyday activities, the depiction of which 
characterizes genre painting. But genre painting, especi ally when it portrayed members of the 
humblest classes, was never popular in eighteenth -century France. The Le Nain brothers and 
Georges de La Tour, who also chose such themes, were largely ignored. Their present high  
standing is due to a different, more d emocratic political climate and to different aesthetic values: 
we no longer require artists to provide ideal images of humanity for our moral edification but 
rather regard such idealization as a falsification of the truth. Duparc gives no improving 
message  and discreetly refrains from judging her subjects. In brief, her works neither elevate 
nor instruct. This restraint largely explains her lack of popular success during her lifetime, even 
if her talent did not go completely unrec ognized by her eighteenth -century French 
contemporaries.  
24. According to the passage, modern viewers are not likely to value which of the 
following qualities in a painting?  
(A) The technical elements of the painting  
(B) The spontaneity of the painting  
(C) The moral lesson imparted by the painting  
(D) The degree to which the painting realistically depicts its subject  
(E) The degree to which the artist s personality is revealed in the painting  
25. If the history of Duparc s artistic reputation were to follow that of the Le Nain 
brothers and Georges de La Tour, present -day assessments of her work would be 
likely to c ontain which of the following?  
(A) An evaluation that accords high status to her  work  
(B) Acknowledgement of her technical expertise  but dismissal of her subject 398 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 matter as trivial  
(C) Agreement with assessments made in her own  time but acknowledgements of 
the exceptional quality of a few of her paintings  
(D) Placement of her among the foremost artists of  her century  
(E) A reclassification of her work as portraiture  rather  than genre painting  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that the term genre painting  would most 
likely apply to which of the following?  
(A) A painting depicting a glorious moment of victory  following a battle  
(B) A painting illustrating a narrative from the Bible  
(C) A portrayal of a mythological Greek goddess  
(D) A portrayal of a servant engaged in his work  
(E) A formal portrait of an eighteenth -century king  
27. The argument of the passa ge best supports which of  the following contentions 
concerning judgments of  artistic work?  
(A) Aesthetic judgments can be influenced by the  political beliefs of those 
making the judgment.  
(B) Judgments of the value of an artist s work made by his or her co ntemporaries 
must be discounted before a true judgment can be made.  
(C) Modern aesthetic taste is once again moving in  the direction of regarding 
idealistic painting  as the most desirable form of painting.  
(D) In order to be highly regarded, an artist cann ot be solely identified with one 
particular kind  of painting.  
(E) Spontaneity is the most valuable quality a portrait painter can have.  
SECTION B 
Mycorrhizal fungi  infect more plants than do any other fungi and are necessary fo r many 
plants to thrive, but they have escaped widespread investigation until recently for two reasons. 
First, the symbiotic association is so well -balanced that the roots of host plants show no 
damage even when densely infected. Second, the fungi cannot as yet be cultivated in the 
absence of a living root. Despite these difficulties, there has been important new work that 
suggests that this symbiotic association can be harnessed to achieve more economical use of 
costly superphosphate fertilizer  and to permit better exploitation of cheaper, less soluble rock 
phosphate. Mycorrhizal benefits are not limited to improved phosphate uptake in host plants. In 
legumes, mycorrhizal inoculation has increased nitrogen fixation beyond l evels achieved by 
adding phosphate fertilizer  alone. Certain symbiotic associations also increase the host plants 
resistance to harmful root fungi. Whether this resistance results from exclusion of harmful fungi 
through compe tition for sites, from metabolic change involving antibiotic production, or from 
increased vigor is undetermined.  
17. Which of the following most accurately describes the passage?   GRE  399 
 (A) A description of a replicable experiment  
(B) A summary report of new fin dings  
(C) A recommendation for abandoning a difficult area of research  
(D) A refutation of an earlier hypothesis  
(E) A confirmation of earlier research  
18. The level of information in the passage above is suited to the needs of all of the 
following people EXCEPT:  
(A) a researcher whose job is to identify potentially profitable areas for research 
and product devel opment  
(B) a state official whose position requires her to alert farmers about possible 
innovations in farming  
(C) an official of a research foundation who identifies research projects for 
potential funding  
(D) a biologist attempting to keep up with scient ific developments in an area 
outside of his immediate area of specialization  
(E) a botanist conducting experiments to determine the relationship between 
degree of mycorrhizal infection and expected uptake of phosphate  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following has been a factor 
influencing the extent to  which research on mycorrhizal fungi has progressed?  
(A) Lack of funding for such research  
(B) Lack of immediate application of such research  
(C) Lack of a method for identifying mycorrhizal fungi  
(D) Difficulties surrounding laboratory production of speci mens for study  
(E) Difficulties ensuing from the high cost and scarcity of superphosphate 
fertilizers  
20. The passage suggests which of the following about the increased resistance to 
harmful root fungi that some plants infected with mycorrhizal fungi seem to 
exhibit ? 
(A) There are at least three hypotheses that might account for the increase.  
(B) An explanation lies in the fact that mycorrhizal fungi increase more rapidly in 
number than harmful root fungi do.  
(C) The plants that show increased resistance also exhibit  improved nitrogen 
fixation.  
(D) Such increases may be independent of mycorrhizal infection.  
(E) It is unlikely that a satisfactory explanation can be found to account for the 
increase.  
In the early 1950s, historians who studied preindustrial Europe (which we may define here 
as Europe in the period from roughly 1300 to 1800) began, for the fi rst time in large numbers, 
to investigate more of the preindustrial European population than the 2 or 3 percent who 400 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 comprised the political and social elite: the kings, generals, judges, nobles, bishops, and local 
magnates who had hitherto usually filled h istory books. One difficulty, however, was that few of 
the remaining 97 percent recorded their thoughts or had them chronicled by contemporaries. 
Faced with this situation, many historians based their investigations on the only records that 
seemed to exist : birth, marriage, and death records. As a result, much of the early work on the 
nonelite was aridly statistical in nature; reducing the vast majority of the population to a set of 
numbers was hardly more enlightening than ignoring them altogether. Histori ans still did not 
know what these people thought or felt.  
One way out of this dilemma was to turn to the records of legal courts, for here the voices 
of the nonelite can most often be heard, as witnesses, plaintiffs, and defendants. These 
documents have ac ted as a point of entry into the mental world of the poor. Historians such as 
Le Roy Ladurie have used the documents to extract case histories, which have illuminated the 
attitudes of different social groups (these attitudes include, but are not confined  to, attitudes 
toward crime and the law) and have revealed how the authorities administered justice. It has 
been societies that have had a developed police system and practiced Roman law , with its 
written depositions, whose court records have yielded the most data to historians. In 
Anglo -Saxon countries hardly any of these benefits obtain, but it has still been possible to glean 
information from the study of legal documents.  
The extraction of case histories is not, however, the only use to which court records may be 
put. Historians who study preindustrial Europe have used the records to establis h a series of 
categories of crime and to quantify indictments that were issued over a given number of years. 
This use of the records does yield some information about the nonelite, but this information 
gives us little insight into the mental lives of the n onelite. We also know that the number of 
indictments in preindustrial Europe bears little relation to the number of actual criminal acts, 
and we strongly suspect that the relationship has varied widely over time. In addition, 
aggregate population estimates  are very shaky, which makes it difficult for historians to 
compare rates of crime per thousand in one decade of the preindustrial period with rates in 
another decade. Given these inadequacies, it is clear why the case history use of court records 
is to be  preferred.  
21. The author suggests that, before the early 1950s, most historians who studied 
preindustrial Europe did which of the following?  
(A) Failed to make distinctions among members of the preindustrial European 
political and social elite.  
(B) Used  investigatory methods that were almost exclusively statistical in nature.  
(C) Inaccurately estimated the influence of the preindustrial European political 
and social elite.  
(D) Confined their work to a narrow range of the preindustrial European 
population . 
(E) Tended to rely heavily on birth, marriage, and death records.  
22. According to the passage, the case histories extracted by historians have  
(A) scarcely illuminated the attitudes of the political and social elite   GRE  401 
 (B) indicated the manner in which t hose in power apportioned justice  
(C) focused almost entirely on the thoughts and feelings of different social groups 
toward crime and the law  
(D) been considered the first kind of historical writing that utilized the records of 
legal courts  
(E) been ba sed for the most part on the trial testimony of police and other legal 
authorities  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that much of the early work by historians on 
the European nonelite of the preindustrial period might have been more 
illuminating if t hese historians had  
(A) used different methods of statistical analysis to investigate the nonelite  
(B) been more successful in identifying the attitudes of civil authorities, 
especially those who administered justice, toward the nonelite  
(C) been able to d raw on more accounts, written by contemporaries of the 
nonelite, that described what this nonelite thought  
(D) relied more heavily on the personal records left by members of the European 
political and social elite who lived during the period in question  
(E) been more willing to base their research on the birth, marriage, and death 
records of the nonelite  
24. The author mentions Le Roy Ladurie (line 26) in order to  
(A) give an example of a historian who has made one kind of use of court records  
(B) cite a  historian who has based case histories on the birth, marriage, and death 
records of the nonelite  
(C) identify the author of the quotation cited in the previous sentence  
(D) gain authoritative support for the view that the case history approach is the 
most  fruitful approach to court records  
(E) point out the first historian to realize the value of court records in illuminating 
the beliefs and values of the nonelite  
25. According to the passage, which of the following is true of indictments for crime 
in Europe in the preindustrial period?  
(A) They have, in terms of their numbers, remained relatively constant over time.  
(B) They give the historian important information about the mental lives of those 
indicted.  
(C) They are not a particularly accurate indica tion of the extent of actual criminal 
activity.  
(D) Their importance to historians of the nonelite has been generally 
overestimated.  
(E) Their problematic relationship to actual crime has not been acknowledged by 
most historians.  402 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 26. It can be inferred from the passage that a historian who wished to compare crime 
rates per thousand in a European city in one decade of the fifteenth c entury with 
crime rates in another decade of that century would probably be most aided by 
better information about which of the following?  
(A) The causes of unrest in the city during the two decades  
(B) The aggregate number of indictments in the city neare st to the city under 
investigation during the two decades  
(C) The number of people who lived in the city during each of the decades under 
investigation  
(D) The mental attitudes of criminals in the city, including their feelings about 
authority, during each  of the decades under investigation  
(E) The possibilities for a member of the citys nonelite to become a member of 
the political and social elite during the two decades  
27. The passage would be most likely to appear as part of  
(A) a book review summari zing the achievements of historians of the European 
aristocracy  
(B) an essay describing trends in the practice of writing history  
(C) a textbook on the application of statistical methods in the social sciences  
(D) a report to the historical profession on t he work of early -twentieth -century 
historians  
(E) an article urging the adoption of historical methods by the legal profession  
No. 7 -1 
SECTION A  
Our visual perception depends on the reception of energy reflecting or radiating from that 
which we wish to perceive. If our eyes could receive and measu re infinitely delicate sense -data, 
we could perceive the world with infinite precision. The natural limits of our eyes have, of 
course, been extended by mechanical instruments; telescopes and microscopes, for example, 
expand our capabilities greatly. There  is, however, an ultimate limit beyond which no 
instrument can take us; this limit is imposed by our inability to receive sense -data smaller than 
those conveyed by an individual quantum of energy. Since these quanta are believed to be 
indivisible packages of energy and so cannot be further refined, we reach a point beyond which 
further resolution of the world is not possible. It is like a drawing a child might make by sticking 
indivisible discs of color onto a canvas.  
We might think that we could avoid this  limitation by using quanta with extremely long 
wavelengths; such quanta would be sufficiently sensitive to convey extremely delicate 
sense -data. And these quanta would be useful, as long as we only wanted to measure energy, 
but a completely accurate perce ption of the world will depend also on the exact measurement 
of the lengths and positions of what we wish to perceive. For this, quanta of extremely long  GRE  403 
 wavelengths are useless. T o measure a length accurately to within a millionth of an inch, we 
must have  a measure graduated in millionths of an inch; a yardstick graduated in inches in 
useless. Quanta with a wavelength of one inch would be, in a sense, measures that are 
graduated in inches. Quanta of extremely long wavelength are useless in measuring anythi ng 
except extremely large dimensions.  
Despite these difficulties, quanta have important theoretical implications f or physics. It 
used to be supposed that, in the observation of nature, the universe could be divided into two 
distinct parts, a perceiving sub ject and a perceived object. In physics, subject and object were 
supposed to be entirely distinct, so that a description of any part of the universe would be 
independent of the observer. The quantum theory , however, suggests otherwise, for every 
observation involves the passage of a complete quantum from the object to the subject, and it 
now appears that this passage constitutes an important coup ling between observer and 
observed. We can no longer make a sharp division between the two in an effort to observe 
nature objectively. Such an attempt at objectivity would distort the crucial interrelatioship of 
observer and observed as parts of a single whole. But, even for scientists, it is only in the world 
of atoms that this new deve lopment makes any appreciable difference in the explanation of 
observations.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) discuss a problem that hinders precise perception of the world  
(B) point out the inadequacies of accepted  units of measurement  
(C) criticize attempts to distinguish between perceiving subjects and perceived 
objects  
(D) compare and contrast rival scientific hypotheses about how the world should 
be measured and observed  
(E) suggest the limited function of se nsory observation  
18. According to the passage, quanta with an extremely long wavelength cannot be 
used to give complete information about the physical world because they  
(A) exist independently of sense -data 
(B) are graduated only in inches  
(C) have an in significant amount of energy  
(D) cannot, with present -day instruments, be isolated from quanta of shorter 
wavelength  
(E) provide an insufficiently precise means of measuring length and position  
19. Which of the following describes a situation most analogous to the situation 
discussed in lines 9 -13? 
(A) A mathematician can only solve problems the solution of which can  be 
deduced from known axiom.  
(B) An animal can respond to no command that is more complicated syntactically 
than any it has previously received.  
(C) A  viewer who has not learned, at least intuitively, the conventions of painting, 404 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 cannot understand perspec tive in a drawing.  
(D) A sensitized film will record no detail on a scale that is smaller than the grain 
of the film.  
(E) A  shadow cast on a screen by an opaque object will have sharp edge only if 
the light source is small or very distant.  
20. The author uses the analogy of the childs drawing (lines 17 -19) primarily in 
order to  
(A) illustrate the ultimate limitation in the precision of sense -data conveyed by 
quanta  
(B) show the sense of helplessness scientists feel in the face of significant 
observational problems  
(C) anticipate the objections of the those scientists who believe that no 
instrumental aid to observation  is entirely reliable  
(D) exemplify the similarities between packages of energy and varieties of color  
(E) disparage those scientists who believe that measurement by means of quanta 
offers an accurate picture of the world  
21. The author implies that making a sharp division between subject and object in 
physics is  
(A) possible in a measurement o objects  length and position, but not in a 
measurement of its energy  
(B) still theoretically possible in the small -scale world of atoms and electrons  
(C) possible in the case of observations involving the passage of a complete 
quantum  
(D) no longer an entirely acc urate way to describe observation of the universe  
(E) a goal at which scientists still aim  
22. The authors use of the phrase in a sense (line 34) implies which of the 
following?  
(A) Quanta of extremely long wavelength are essentially graduated in inches.  
(B) quanta of one -inch wavelength are not pr ecisely analogous to yardsticks 
graduated in inches.  
(C) Quanta of extremely long wavelength, in at least on e respect, resemble 
quanta of shorter wavelength.  
(D) quanta of on -inch wavelength and quanta of extremely long wavelength do 
not differ only in th eir wavelengths.  
(E) quanta of one -inch wavelength must be measured by different standards than 
quanta of extremely long wavelength.  
23. According to the passage, the quantum theory can be distinguished from previous 
theories of physics by its  
(A) insistence on scrupul ously precise mathematical formulations   GRE  405 
 (B) understanding of the inherent interrelationship of perceiver and perceived  
(C) re cognition of the need for sophisticated instruments of measurement  
(D) emphasis on small -scale rather than on large -scale phenomena  
(E) regard for philosophical issues as well as for strictly scientific ones  
Tillie Olsens fiction and essays have been widely and rightly acknowledged as major 
contributions to American literature. Her work has been particularly valued by contemporary  
feminists. Yet few of Olsens readers realize the extent to which her vision and choice of subject 
are rooted in an earlier literary heritage the tradition of radical political thought, mostly 
socialist and anarchist, of the 1910s and 1920s, and the Old  Left tradition of the 1930s. I do 
not mean that one can adequately explain the eloquence of her work in terms of its political 
origins, or that left -wing politics were the single most important influence on it. My point is that 
its central consciousness its profound understanding of class and gender as shaping 
influences on peoples lives owes much to that earlier literary heritage, a heritage that, in 
general, has not been sufficiently valued by most contemporary literary critics.  
24. The primary p urpose  of the passage is to  
(A) argue that Olsens understanding of class and gender is her greatest gift as a 
writer  
(B) acknowledge Olsens importance as the leading spo kesperson for a radical 
literary heritage  
(C) point out a literary heritage to which Olsen s work is related  
(D) urge literary critics to investigate the origins of a literary heritage  
(E) suggest that Olsens work has been placed in a literary heritage to which it 
does not belong  
25. According to the author, which of the following is true of  the heritage mentioned 
in the passage?  
(A) It emphasizes gender as the determinate influence on peoples lives . 
(B) It has been the most important influence on Olsens work.  
(C) It includes political traditions that span three decades of the twentieth cen tury. 
(D) It explains the eloquence but not the subject matter of Olsens work.  
(E) It reflects primarily the development of socialist political thought in the early 
twentieth century.  
26. In the sentence I do not  influence on it  (lines 10 -14), the author dos which of 
the following?  
(A) Broadens an existing classification.  
(B) Contradicts the passages central thesis.  
(C) Qualifies a commonly accepted point of view.  
(D) Presents conflicting explanations for a phenomenon.  
(E) Denies possible interpretations of an earlier assertion.  406 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 27. According to the author, Olsens work ha s been  
(A) rightly acknowledged for its contribution to political thought  
(B) thought to represent the beginning of new literary tradition  
(C) a needed impetus for social change  
(D) most clearly influenced by feminism  
(E) deservedly admired by readers  
SECTION B 
Currently, the paramount problem in the field of biomaterials, the science of replacing 
diseased tissue with human -made implants, is control over the interface, or surface, between 
implanted biomate rials and living tissues. The physical properties  of most tissues can be 
matched by careful selection of raw materials: metals, ceramics, or several varieties of polymer 
materials. Even the requirement that biomaterials processed from these materials be nontoxic 
to host tissue can be met by techniques de rived from studying the reactions of tissue cultures 
to biomaterials or from short -term implants. But achieving necessary matches in physical 
properties across interfaces between living and non -living matter requires knowledge of which 
molecules control th e bonding of cells to each other an area that we have not yet explored 
thoroughly. Although recent research has allowed us to stabilize the tissue -biomaterial interface 
by controlling either the chemical reactions or the microstructure of the biomaterial, our 
fundamental understanding of how implant  devices adhere to tissues remains woefully 
incomplete.  
17. According to the passage, the major problem currently facing scientists in the 
field of biomaterials is  
(A) assessing and regulating the bonding between  host tissue and implants  
(B) controlling the transfer of potentially tox ic materials across the interface of 
tissue and implant  
(C) discovering new materials from which to construct implant devices  
(D) deciding in what situations implants are needed  
(E) determi ning the importance of short -term implants to long -term stability of 
tissue -implant interfaces  
18. The passage suggests which of the following about the recent research mentioned 
in lines 19 -25? 
(A) It has solved one set of problems but has created another.  
(B) It has concentrated on secondary concerns but has ignored primary concerns.  
(C) It has improved practical applications of biomaterial technology without 
providing a complete theoretical explanation of that improvement.  
(D) It has thoro ughly investigated properties of biomaterials but has paid little 
attention to relevant characteristics of human tissue.  
(E) It has provided considerable information on short -term implant technology 
but little on long -term implant technology.   GRE  407 
 19. The authors primary purpose is to  
(A) answer a theoretical question in the field of biomaterials  
(B) discuss the current stat e of technology in the field of biomaterials  
(C) resolve a research dispute in the field of biomaterial  
(D) predict an ethical crisis for biomaterials researchers  
(E) suggest some practical benefits of biomaterial implants  
Islamic law is a particularly instructive example of sacred law. Islamic law is a 
phenomenon so different from all other forms of law notwithstanding, of course, a 
considerable and inevitable number of coincidences with one or the other of them as far as 
subject matter and positive e nactments are concerned that its study is indispensable in order 
to appreciate adequately the full range of possible legal phenomena. Even the two other 
representatives of sacred law that are historically and geographically nearest to it, Jewish law 
and Ro man Catholic canon law , are perceptibly different.  
Both Jewish law and canon law are more uniform than Islamic l aw. Though historically 
there is a discernible break between Jewish law of the sovereign state of ancient Israel and of 
the Di aspora (the dispersion of Jewish people after the conquest of Israel), the spirit of the 
legal matter in later parts of the Old Testament is very close to that of the Talmud, one of the 
primary codifications of Jewish law in the Diaspora. Islam, on the oth er hand, represented a 
radical breakaway from the Arab paganism that preceded it; Islamic law is the result of an 
examination, from a religious angle, of legal subject matter that was far from uniform, 
comprising as it did the various components of the law s of pre -Islamic Arabia and numerous 
legal elements taken over from the non -Arab peoples of the conquered territories. All this was 
unified by being subjected to the same kind of religious scrutiny, the impact of which varied 
greatly, being almost nonexist ent in some fields, and in others originating novel institutions. 
This central duality of legal subject matter and religious norm is additional to the variety of legal, 
ethical, and ritual rules that is typical of sacred law.  
In its relation to the secular  state, Islamic law differed from both Jewish and canon law. 
Jewish law was buttressed by the cohesion of the community, reinforced by pressure from 
outside; its rules are the direct expression of this feeling of cohesion, tending toward the 
accommodation of dissent. Canon and Islamic aw, on the contrary, were dominated by the 
dualism of religion and state, where the state was not, in contrast with Judaism, an alien power 
but the political expression of the same religion. But the conflict between state and religion took 
different forms; in Christianity it appeared as the struggle for political power on the part of a 
tightly organized ecclesiastical hierarchy, and canon law was one of its political weapons. 
Islamic law, on the other hand, was never supported by an organized institution; consequently, 
there never developed an overt trial of strength. There merely existed discordance between 
application of the sacred law and many of the regulations framed by Islamic states; this 
antagonism varied according to pl ace and time.  
20. The authors purpose in comparing Islamic law to Jewish law and  canon law is 
most probably to  
(A) contend that traditional legal subject matter does not play a large role in 
Islamic law  408 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) support his argument that Islamic law is a uniqu e kind of legal phenomenon  
(C) emphasize the variety of forms that can all be considered sacred law  
(D) provide an example of how he believes comparative institutional study should 
be undertaken  
(E) argue that geographical and historic al proximity does not necessarily lead to 
parallel institutional development  
21. The passage provides information to answer which of the following questions?  
(A) Does Islamic law depend on sources other than Arab  legal principles?  
(B) What secular practices of Islamic states conflicted with Islamic law?  
(C) Are Jewish law and canon law the most typical examples of sacred law?  
(D) Is Jewish law more uniform than canon law?  
(E) What characterized Arab law of the pre-Islamic era?  
22. According to the passage, which of the following statements about sacred law is 
correct?  
(A) The various systems of sacred law originated in a limited geographical area.  
(B) The various systems of sacred law have had marked influence o n one another.  
(C) Systems of sacred l aw usually rely on a wide variety of precedents.  
(D) Systems of sacred law generally contain prescriptions governing diverse 
aspects of human activity.  
(E) Systems of sacred law function most effectively in communities with 
relatively small populations.  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that the application of Islamic law in Islamic 
states has  
(A) systematically been opposed by groups who believ e it is contrary to their 
interests  
(B) suffered irreparably from the lack of firm institutional backing  
(C) frequently been at odds with the legal activity of government institutions  
(D) remained unaffected by the political forces operating alongside it  
(E) benefited from the fact that it never experienced a direct confrontation with 
the state  
24. Which of the following most accurately describes the organization of the 
passage?  
(A) A universal principle is advanced and then discussed in relation to a pa rticular 
historical phenomenon.  
(B) A methodological innovation is suggested and then examples of its efficacy 
are provided.  
(C) A traditional interp retation is questioned and then modified to include new 
data.   GRE  409 
 (D) A general opinion is expressed and then s upportive illustrations are advanced.  
(E) A controversial viewpoint is presented and then both supportive evidence and 
contradictory evidence are cited.  
25. The passage implies that the relationship of Islamic, Jewish, and canon law is 
correctly described by which of the following statemen ts? 
I. Because each constitutes an example of sacred law, they necessarily share 
some features.  
II. They each developed in reaction to the interference of secular political 
institutions.  
III. The differences among them result partly from their differing em phasis on 
purely ethical rules.  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
26. The passage suggests that canon law differs from Islamic law in that only canon 
law 
(A) contains prescriptions that nonsacred legal systems might regard as properly 
legal  
(B) concerns itself with the duties of a person in regard to the community as a 
whole  
(C) was affected by the tension of the conflict between religion and state  
(D) developed in a political environment that did not challenge its fundamental 
existence  
(E) played a role in the direct confrontation between instit utions vying for power  
27. All of the following statements about the development of Islamic law are implied 
in the passage EXCEPT:  
(A) Pre -Islamic legal principles were incorporated into Islamic law with widely 
differing degrees of change.  
(B) Diverse lega l elements were joined together through the application of a 
purely religious criterion.  
(C) Although some of the sources of Islamic law were pagan, its integrity as a 
sacred law was not compromised by their incorporation.  
(D) There was a fundamental share d characteristic in all pre -Islamic legal matter 
taken over by Islamic law.  
(E) Although Islam emerged among the Arabs, Islamic law was influenced by 
ethnically diverse elements.  410 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 No. 7 -2 
SECTION A  
Eight percent of the Earths crust is aluminum, and ther e are hundreds of 
aluminum -bearing minerals and vast quantities of the rocks that contain them. The best 
aluminum ore is bauxite, defined as aggregates of aluminous minerals, more or less impure, in 
which aluminum is present as hydrated oxides. Bauxite is the richest of all those aluminous 
rocks that occur in large quantities, and it yields alumina, the intermediate product required for 
the production of aluminum. Alumina also occurs naturally as the mineral corundum, but 
corundum is not found in large depo sits of high purity, and therefore it is an impractical source 
for making aluminum. Most of the many abundant nonbauxite aluminous minerals are silicates, 
and, like all silicate minerals, they are refractory, resistant to analysis, and extremely difficult to 
process. The aluminum silicates are therefore generally unsuitable alternatives to bauxite 
because considerably more energy is required to extract alumina from them.  
17. The author implies that a mineral must either be or readily supply which of the 
following in order to be classified as an aluminum ore?  
(A) An aggregate  
(B) Bauxite  
(C) Alumina  
(D) Corundum  
(E) An aluminum silicate  
18. The passage supplies information for answering all of the following questions 
regarding aluminous minerals EXCEPT:  
(A) What percentage of the aluminum in the Earths crust is in the form of 
bauxite?  
(B) Are aluminum -bearing nonbauxite minerals plentiful?  
(C) Do the aluminous minerals found in bauxite contain hydrated oxides?  
(D) Are aluminous hydrated oxides found in roc ks? 
(E) Do large quantities of bauxite exist?  
19. The author implies that corundum would be used to produce aluminum if  
(A) corundum could be found that is not contaminated by silicates  
(B) the production of alumina could be eliminated as an intermediate s tep in 
manufacturing aluminum  
(C) many large deposits of very high quality corundum were to be discovered  
(D) new technologies were to make it possible to convert corundum to a silicate  
(E) manufacturers were to realize that the worlds supply of bauxit e is not 
unlimited  
Traditionally, the study of history has had fixed boundaries and focal points periods,  GRE  411 
 countries, dramatic events, and great leaders. It also has had clear and firm notions of scholarly 
procedure: how one inquires into a historical probl em, how one presents and documents ones 
findings, what constitutes admissible and adequate proof.  
Anyone who has followed recent historical literature can testify to the revolution that is 
taking place in historical studies. The currently fashionable subj ects come directly from the 
sociology catalog: childhood, work, leisure. The new subjects are accompanied by new 
methods. Where history once was primarily narrative, it is now entirely analytic. The old 
questions What happened? and How did it happen? h ave given way to the question Why 
did it happen? Prominent among the methods used to answer the question Why is 
psychoanalysis, and its use has given rise to psychohistory.  
Psychohistory does not merely use psychological explanations in historical cont exts. 
Historians have always used such explanations when they were appropriate and when there 
was sufficient evidence for them. But this pragmatic use of psychology is not what 
psychohistorians intend. They are committed, not just to psychology in general,  but to Freudian 
psychoanalysis. This commitment precludes a commitment to history as historians have always 
understood it. Psychohistory derives its facts not from history, the detailed records of events 
and their consequences, but from psychoanalysis o f the individuals who made history, and 
deduces its theories not from this or that instance in their lives, but from a view of human 
nature that transcends history. It denies the basic criterion of historical evidence: that evidence 
be publicly accessible to, and therefore assessable by, all historians. And it violates the basic 
tenet of historical method: that historians be alert to the negative instances that would refute 
their theses. Psychohistorians, convinced of the absolute rightness of their own the ories, are 
also convinced that theirs is the deepest explanation of any event, that other explanations fall 
short of the truth.  
Psychohistory is not content to violate the discipline of history (in the sense of the proper 
mode of studying and writing abo ut the past); it also violates the past itself. It denies to the 
past an integrity and will of its own, in which people acted out of a variety of motives and in 
which events had a multiplicity of causes and effects. It imposes upon the past the same 
determ inism that it imposes upon the present, thus robbing people and events of their 
individuality and of their complexity. Instead of respecting the particularity of the past, it 
assimilates all events, past and present, into a single deterministic schema that  is presumed to 
be true at all times and in all circumstances.  
20. Which of the following best states the main point of the passage?  
(A) The approach of psychohistorians to historical study is currently in vogue 
even though it lacks the rigor and verifiabi lity of traditional historical 
method.  
(B) Traditional historians can benefit from studying the techniques and findings 
of psychohistorians.  
(C) Areas of sociological study such as childhood and work are of little interest to 
traditional historians.  
(D) Th e psychological assessment of an individuals behavior and attitudes is 
more informative than the details of his or her daily life.  412 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) History is composed of unique and nonrepeating events that must be 
individually analyzed on the basis of publicly verifiable evidence.  
21. It can be inferred from the passage that one way in which traditional history can 
be distinguished from psych ohistory is that traditional history usual ly 
(A) views past events as complex and having their own individuality  
(B) relies on a single interpretation of human behavior to explain historical events  
(C) interprets historical events in such a way that their specific nature is 
transcended  
(D) turns to psychological explanations in historical contexts to account for 
events  
(E) relies strictly on data that are concrete and quantifiable  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that the methods used by psychohistorians 
probably prevent them from  
(A) presenting their material in chron ological order  
(B) producing a one -sided p icture of an individual s personality and motivations  
(C) uncovering alternative explanations that might cause them to question their 
own conclusions  
(D) offering a consistent interpretation of the impact of personality on historical 
events  
(E) recogniz ing connections between a gove rnment s political actions and the 
aspirations of government leaders  
23. The passage supplies information for answering which of the following 
questions?  
(A) What are some specific examples of the use of psychohistory in histo rical 
interpretation?  
(B) When were the conventions governing the practice of traditional history first 
established?  
(C) When do traditional historians consider psychological explanations of 
historical developments appropriate?  
(D) What sort of historical figure is best suited for psychohistorical analysis?  
(E) What is the basic criterion of historical evidence required by traditional 
historians?  
24. The author mentions which of the following as a characteristic of the practice of 
psychohistorians?  
(A) The lives of historical figures are presented in episodic rather than narrative 
form.  
(B) Archives used by psychohistorians to gather material are not accessible to 
other scholars.  
(C) Past and current events are all placed within the same deterministic sc hema.   GRE  413 
 (D) Events in the adult life of a historical figure are seen to be more consequential 
than are those in the childhood of the figure.  
(E) Analysis is focused on group behavior rather than on particular events in an 
individual s life.  
25. The author of the passage suggests that psychohistorians view history primarily 
as 
(A) a report of events, causes, and effects that is generally acc epted by historians 
but which is, for the most part, unverifiable  
(B) an episodic account that lacks cohesion because records of the role of 
childhood,  work, and leisure in the lives of historical figures are rare  
(C) an uncharted sea of seemingly unexplai nable events that have meaning only 
when examined as discrete units  
(D) a record of the way in which a closed set of immutable psychological laws 
seems to have shaped events  
(E) a proof of the existence of intricate causal interrelationships between past and 
present events  
26. The author of the passage puts the word deepest  (line 44) in quotation marks 
most probably in order to  
(A) signal her reservations about the accur acy of psychohistorians  claims for 
their work  
(B) draw attention to a contradiction in the psychohistorians  method  
(C) emphasize the major difference between the traditional historians  method 
and that of psychohistorians  
(D) disassociate her opinion of the psychohistorians  claims from her opinion of 
their method  
(E) question the usefulness of psychohistorians  insights into traditional historical 
scholarship  
27. In presenting her analysis, the author does all of the following EXCEPT:  
(A) Make general statement without reference to specific examples.  
(B) Descri be some of the criteria employed by traditional historians.  
(C) Question the adequacy of the psychohistorian s interpretation of events.  
(D) Point out inconsistencies in the psychohistorians  application of their 
methods.  
(E) Contrast the underlying ass umptions of  psych ohistorians  with those of 
traditional historians.  
SECTION B 
Jean Wagner s most enduring contribution to the study of Afro -American poetry is his 
insistence that it be analyzed in a religious, as well as secular, frame of reference. The 414 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 appropriateness of such an approach may seem self -evident for a tradition commencing with 
spirituals and owing its early forms, rhythms, vocabulary, and evangelical fervor to Wesleyan 
hymnals. But before Wagner a secular outlook that analyzed Black poetry sol ely within the 
context of political and social protest was dominant in the field.  
It is Wagner who first demonstrated the essential fusion of racial and religious feeling in 
Afro-American poetry. The two, he argued, form a symbiotic union in which religiou s feelings 
are often applied to racial issues and racial problems are often projected onto a metaphysical 
plane. Wagner found this most eloquently illustrated in the Black spiritual, where the desire for 
freedom in this world and the hope for salvation in the next are inextricably intertwined.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) contrast the theories of Jean Wagner with those of other contemporary critics  
(B) document the influence of Jean Wagner on the development of 
Afro -American poetry  
(C) explain the relevance of Jean Wagner s work to the study of Afro -American  
religion  
(D) indicate the importance of Jean Wagner s analysis of Afro -American poetry  
(E) present the contributions of Jean Wagner  to the study of Black spirituals  
18. All of the following aspects of Afro -American poetry are referred to in the 
passage as having been influenced by Wesleyan hymnals EXCEPT:  
(A) subject matter  
(B) word choi ce 
(C) rhythm  
(D) structure  
(E) tone 
19. It can be inferred from the passage that, before Wagner, most students of 
Afro -American poetry did which of the following?  
(A) Contributed appreciably to the transfer of political protest from 
Afro -American poetr y to direct political action.  
(B) Ignored at least some of the historical roots of Afro -American poetry.  
(C) Analyzed fully the aspects of social protest to be found in such traditional 
forms of Afro -American poetry as the Black spiritual.  
(D) Regarded as unimportant the development of fervent emotionalism in a 
portion of Afro -American poetry.  
(E) Concentrated on the complex relations between the technical elements in 
Afro -American poetry and its political content.  
Two relatively recent independent developments stand behind  the current major research 
effort on nitroge n fixation, the process by which bacteria symbiotically render leguminous 
plants independent of nitrogen fertilizer. The one development has been the rapid, sustained 
increase in the price of nitrogen fertilizer . The other deve lopment has been the rapid growth of  GRE  415 
 knowledge of and technical sophistication in genetic engineering. Fertilizer prices, largely tied 
to the price of natural gas, huge amounts of which go into the manufacture of fertilizer, will 
continue to represent an e normous and escalating economic burden on modern agriculture, 
spurring the search for alternatives to synthetic fertilizers. And genetic engineering is just the 
sort of fundamental breakthrough that opens up prospects of wholly novel alternatives. One 
such novel idea is that of inserting into the chromosomes of plants discrete genes that are not 
a part of the plants  natural constitution: specifically, the idea of inserting into nonleguminous 
plants the genes, if they can be identified and isolated, that fi t the leguminous plants to be 
hosts for nitrogen -fixing bacteria. Hence, the intensified research on legumes.  
Nitrogen fixation is a process in which certain bacteria use atmospheric nitrogen gas, which 
green plants cannot directly utilize, to produce ammo nia, a nitrogen compound plants can use. 
It is one of nature s great ironies that the availability of nitrogen in the soil frequently sets an 
upper limit on plant growth even though the plants  leaves are bathed in a sea of nitrogen gas. 
The leguminous pla ntsamong them crop plants such as soybeans, peas, alfalfa, and 
clover have solved the nitrogen supply problem by entering into a symbiotic relationship with 
the bacterial genus  Rhizobium ; as a matter of fact , there is a specific strain of Rhizobium  for 
each species of legume. The host plant supplies the bacteria with food and a protected habitat 
and receives surplus ammonia in exchange. Hence, legumes can thrive in nitrogen -depleted 
soil. 
Unfortunately, m ost of the major food crops including maize, wheat, rice, and 
potatoes cannot. On the contrary, many of the high -yielding hybrid varieties of these food 
crops bred during the Green Revolution of the 1960 s were selected specifically to give high 
yields in response to generous applications of nitrogen fertilizer. This poses an additional, 
formidable challenge to plant geneticists: they must work on enhancing fixation within the 
existing symbioses. Unless they succeed, the yield gains of the Green Revolution will be largely 
lost even if the genes in legumes that equip those plants to enter into a symbiosis with nitrogen 
fixers are identified and isolated, and even if the transfer of those gene complexes, once they 
are found, becomes possible. The overall task looks forbidding, but the stakes are too high not 
to undertake it.  
20. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) expose the fragile nature of the foundations on which the high yields of 
modern agriculture rest  
(B) argue that genetic engineering promises  to lead to even higher yields than are 
achievable with synthetic fertilizers  
(C) argue that the capacity for nitrogen -fixing symbioses is transferable to 
nonleguminous plants  
(D) explain the reasons for and the objectives of current research on 
nitrogen -fixing symbioses  
(E) describe the nature of the genes that regulate the symbiosis between legumes 
and certain bacteria  
21. According to the passage, there is currently no strain of Rhizobium that can enter 
into a symbiosis with  416 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) alfalfa  
(B) clover  
(C) maize  
(D) peas  
(E) soybeans  
22. The passage implies that which of the following is true of the bacterial genus 
Rhizobium ? 
(A) Rhizobium  bacteria are found primarily in nitrogen -depleted soils.  
(B) Some strains of Rhizobium  are not capable of entering into a symbiosis  with 
any plant.  
(C) Newly bred varieties of legumes cannot be hosts to any strain of Rhizobium . 
(D) Rhizobium  bacteria cannot survive outside the protected habitat provided by 
host plants.  
(E) Rhizobium  bacteria produce some ammonia for their own purpo ses. 
23. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following was the most 
influential factor in bringing about intensified research on nitrogen fixation?  
(A) The high yields of the Green Revolution  
(B) The persistent upward surge in natural gas  prices  
(C) The variety of Rhizobium  strains  
(D) The mechanization of modern agriculture  
(E) The environmental ill effects of synthetic fertilizers  
24. Which of the following situations is most closely analogous to the situation 
described by the author as one of natures great ironies (lines 28 -32)? 
(A) That of a farmer whose crops have fa iled because the normal midseason rains 
did not materialize and no preparations for irrigation had been made  
(B) That of a long -distance runner who loses a marathon race because of a wrong 
turn that cost him twenty seconds  
(C) That of shipwrecked sailors a t sea in a lifeboat, with one flask of drinking 
water to share among them  
(D) That of a motorist who runs out of gas a mere five miles from the nearest gas 
station  
(E) That of travelers who want to reach their destination as fast and as cheaply as 
possible, but find that cost increases as travel speed increases  
25. According to the passage, the ultimate goal of the current research on nitrogen 
fixation is to deve lop 
(A) strains of Rhizobium  that can enter into symbioses with existing varieties of 
wheat, rice, and other nonlegumes  
(B) strains of Rhizobium  that produce more ammonia for leguminous host plants  GRE  417 
 than do any of the strains presently known  
(C) varieties o f wheat, rice, and other nonlegumes that yield as much as do 
existing varieties, but require less nitrogen  
(D) varieties of wheat, rice, and other nonlegumes that maintain an adequate 
symbiotic relationship with nitrogen -fixing bacteria and produce high yi elds 
(E) high -yielding varieties of wheat, rice, and other nonlegumes that are 
genetically equipped to fix nitrogen from the air without the aid of bacteria  
26. The author regards the research program under discussion as  
(A) original and extensive but i ll-defined as to method  
(B) necessary and ambitious but vulnerable to failure  
(C) cogent and worthwhile but severely under -funded  
(D) prohibitively expensive but conceptually elegant  
(E) theoretically fascinating but practically useless  
27. Most nearly parallel, in its fundamental approach, to the research program 
described in the passage would be a program designed to  
(A) achieve greater frost resistance in frost -tender food plants by means of 
selective breeding, thereby expanding those plants area of cultivation  
(B) achieve greater yields from food plants by interplanting crop plants that are 
mutually beneficial  
(C) find inexpensive and abundant natural substances that could, without 
reducing yields, be substituted for expensive synthetic fertilizers  
(D) change the genetic makeup of food plants that cannot live in water with high 
salinity, using genes from plants adapted to salt water  
(E) develop, through genetic engineering, a genetic configuration for the major 
food plants that improves the storage  characteristics of the edible portion of 
the plants  
No. 7 -3 
SECTION A  
Of Homer s two epic poems, the Odyssey has always been more popular than the Iliad, 
perhaps because it includes more features of mythology that are accessible to readers. Its 
subject (t o use Maynard Mack s categories) is life-as-spectacle,  for readers, diverted by its 
various incidents, observe its hero Odysseus primarily from without; the tragic Iliad, however, 
presents life-as-experience : readers are asked to identify with the mind  of Achilles, whose 
motivations render him a not particularly likable hero. In addition, the Iliad, more than the 
Odyssey , suggests the complexity of the gods  involvement in human actions, and to the extent 
that modern readers find this complexity a needl ess complication, the Iliad is less satisfying 
than the Odyssey , with its simpler scheme of divine justice. Finally, since the Iliad presents a 
historically verifiable action, Troy s siege, the poem raises historical questions that are absent 418 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 from the Odysseys blithely imaginative world.  
17. The author uses Mack s categories  (lines 4 -5) most probably in order to  
(A) argue that the Iliad  should replace the Odyssey  as the more popular poem  
(B) indicate Mack s importance as a commentator on the Iliad  and th e Odyssey  
(C) suggest one way in which the Iliad  and the Odyssey  can be distinguished  
(D) point out some of the difficulties faced by readers of the Iliad  and the 
Odyssey  
(E) demonstrate that the Iliad  and the Odyssey can best be distinguished by 
comparing their respective heroes  
18. The author suggests that the variety of incidents in the Odyssey  is likely to deter 
the reader from  
(A) concentrating on the poem s mythol ogical features  
(B) concentrating on the psychological states of the poem s central character  
(C) accepting the explanation that have been offered for the poem s popularity  
(D) accepting the poem s scheme of divine justice  
(E) accepting Maynard Mack s theory that the poem s subject is 
life-as-spectacle  
19. The passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) distinguishing arguments  
(B) applying classifications  
(C) initiating a debate  
(D) resolving a dispute  
(E) developing a contrast  
20. It can be inferred f rom the passage that a reader of the Iliad  is likely to have 
trouble identifying with the  poem s hero for which of the following reasons?  
(A) The hero is eventually revealed to be unheroic.  
(B) The hero can be observed by the reader only from without.  
(C) The hero s psychology is not historically verifiable.  
(D) The hero s emotions often do not seem appealing to the reader.  
(E) The hero s emotions are not sufficiently various to engage the reader s 
attention.  
Flatfish, such as the flounder, are among the few vertebrates that lack approximate 
bilateral symmetry (symmetry in which structures to the left and right of the bod ys midline are 
mirror images). Most striking among the many asymmetries evident in an adult flatfish is eye 
placement: before maturity one eye migrates, so that in an adult flatfish both eyes are on the 
same side of the head. While in most species with as ymmetries virtually all adults share the 
same asymmetry, members of the starry flounder  species can be either left -eyed (both eyes  on 
the left side of head) or right -eyed. In the waters between the United States and Japan, the  GRE  419 
 starry flounder  populations v ary from about 50 percent left -eyed off the  United States West 
Coast, throu gh about 70 percent left -eyed halfway between the United States and Japan, to 
nearly 100 percent left -eyed off the Japanese coast.  
Biologists call this kind of gradual variation over a certain geographic range a cline and 
interp ret clines as strong indications that the variation is adaptive, a response to environmental 
differences. For the starry flounder this interpretation implies that a geometric difference 
(between fish that are mirror images of one another) is adaptive, that  left-eyedness in the 
Japanese starry flounder has been selected for, which provokes a perplexing questions : what is 
the selective advantage  in having both eyes on one side rather than on the other?  
The ease with which a fish can reverse the effect of the sidedness of its eye asymmetry 
simply by turning around has caused  biologists to study internal anatomy, especially the optic 
nerves, for the answer. In all flatfish  the optic nerves cross, so that the right optic nerve is 
joined to the brain s left side and vice versa. This crossing introduces an asymmetry, as one 
optic nerve must cross above or below the other. G. H. Parker reasoned th at if, for example, a 
flatfish s left eye migrated when the right optic nerve was on top, there would be a twisting of 
nerves, which might be mechanically disadvantageous. For starry flounders, then, the left -eyed 
variety would be selected against, since i n a starry flounder the left optic nerve is uppermost.  
The problem with the above explanation is that the Japanese starry flounder population is 
almost exclusively  left-eyed, an natural selection never promotes a purely less advantageous 
variation. As othe r explanations  proved equally untenable, biologists concluded that there is no 
important adaptive difference between left -eyedness and right -eyedness, and that the two 
characteristics are genetically associated with some other adaptively significant charac teristic. 
This situation is one commonly encountered by evolutionary biologists, who must often decide 
whether a characteristic is adaptive or  selectively neutral. As for the left -eyed and right -eyed 
flatfish, their difference, however striking, appears to  be an evolutionary red herring . 
21. According to the passage, starry flounder differ from most other species of 
flatfish in that starry flounder  
(A) are not basically bilaterally symmetric  
(B) do not become asymmetric until adulthood  
(C) do not all share the same asymmetry  
(D) have both eyes on the same side of the head  
(E) tend to cluster in only certain geographic regions  
22. The author would be most likely to agree with which of the following statements 
about left -eyedness and right -eyedness in the starry flounder?  
I. They are adaptive variations by the starry flounder to environmental 
differences.  
II. They do not seem to give obvious selective advantages to the starry flounder.  
III. They occur in different proportions in different locations.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  420 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
23. According to the passage, a possible disadvantage associated with eye migration 
in flatfish is that the optic nerves can  
(A) adhere to one another  
(B) detach from the eyes  
(C) cross  
(D) stretch  
(E) twist  
24. Which of the follo wing best describes the organization of the passage as a whole?  
(A) A phenomenon is described and an interpretation presented and rejected.  
(B) A generalization is made and supporting evidence is supplied and weighed.  
(C) A contradiction is noted and a res olution is suggested and then modified.  
(D) A series of observations is presented and explained in terms of the dominant 
theory.  
(E) A hypothesis is introduced and corroborated in the light of new evidence.  
25. The passage supplies information for answering which of the following 
questions?  
(A) Why are Japanese starry flounder mostly left -eyed?  
(B) Why should the eye -sidedness i n starry flounder be considered selectively 
neutral?  
(C) Why have biologists recently become interested in whether a characteristic is 
adaptive or selectively neutral?  
(D) How do the eyes in flatfish migrate?  
(E) How did Parker make his discoveries abou t the anatomy of optic nerves in 
flatfish?  
26. Which of the following is most clearly similar to a  cline as it is described in the 
second paragraph of the passage?  
(A) A vegetable market in which the various items are grouped according to place 
of origin  
(B) A wheat field in which different varieties of wheat are planted to yield a crop 
that will bring the maximum profit  
(C) A flower stall in which the various species of flowers are arranged according 
to their price  
(D) A housing development in which the le ngth of the front struts supporting the 
porch of each house increases as houses are built up the hill  
(E) A national park in which the ranger stations are placed so as to be  GRE  421 
 inconspicuous, and yet as  easily accessible as possible  
27. Which of the follow ing phrases from the passage best expresses the author s 
conclusion about the meaning of the difference between left -eyed and right -eyed 
flatfish?  
(A)  Most striking  (line 4)  
(B)  variation is adaptive  (line 19)  
(C)  mechanically disadvantageous  (lines 3738)  
(D)  adaptively significant  (lines 48 -49) 
(E) evolutionary red herring  (line 54)  
SECTION B 
If a supernova (the explosion of a massive star) triggered star formation from dense clouds 
of gas and dust, and if the most massive star to be formed from the cloud evolved into a 
supernova and trigge red a new round of star formation, and so on, then a chain of star -forming 
regions would result. If many such chains were created in a differentially rotating galaxy, the 
distribution of stars would resemble the observed distribut ion in a spiral galaxy . 
This line of reasoning underlies an exciting new theory of spiral -galaxy structure. A 
computer simulation based on this theory has reproduced the appearance of many spiral 
galaxies without assuming an underlying density wave, the hallmark  of the most widely 
accepted theory of the large -scale structure of spiral galaxies. That theory maintains that a 
density wave of spiral form sweeps through the central plane of a galaxy, compressing clouds of 
gas and dust, which collapse into stars that form a spiral pattern.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) describe what results when a supernova triggers the  creation of chains of 
star-forming regions  
(B) propose a modification in the most widely accepted theory of spiral -galaxy 
structure  
(C) compare and contrast the roles of clouds of gas and dust in two theories of 
spiral -galaxy structure  
(D) describe a new theory of spiral -galaxy structure and contrast it with the most 
widely accepted theory  
(E) describe a new theory of spiral -galaxy structure and discuss a reason why it is 
inferior to the most widely accepted theory  
18. The passage implies that, according to the new theory of spiral -galaxy structure, a 
spiral galaxy can be created by supe rnovas when the supernovas are  
(A) producing an underlying density wave  
(B) affected by a density wave of spiral form  
(C) distributed in a spiral pattern  
(D) located in the central plane of a galaxy  422 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) located in a differentially rotating galaxy  
19. Which of the following, if true, would most discredit the new theory as described 
in the passage?  
(A) The exact mechanism by which a star becomes a supernova is not yet 
completely known and may even differ for different stars.  
(B) Chains of star -forming regi ons like those postulated in the new theory have 
been observed in the vicinity of dense clouds of gas and dust.  
(C) The most massive stars formed from supernova explosions are unlikely to 
evolve into supernovas.  
(D) Computer simulations of supernovas provi de a poor picture of what occurs 
just before a supernova explosion.  
(E) A density wave cannot compress clouds of gas and dust to a density high 
enough to create a star.  
20. The authors attitude toward the new theory of spiral -galaxy structure can best be 
described as  
(A) euphoric  
(B) enthusiastic  
(C) concerned  
(D) critical  
(E) disputatious  
The first mention of slavery in the statutes of the English colonies of North America does 
not occur until after 1660 some forty years after the importation of the  first Black people. Lest 
we think that slavery existed in fact before it did in law, Oscar and Mary Handlin assure us that 
the status of Black people down to  the 1660s was that of servants. A critique of the Handlins 
interpretation of why legal slavery did not appear until the 1660s suggests that assumptions 
about the relation between slavery and racial prejudice should be reexamined, and that 
explanations for the different treatment of Black slaves in North and South America should be 
expanded.  
The Handlins explain the appearance of legal slavery by arguing that, during the 1660s, 
the position of White servants was improving relative to that of Black servants. Thus, the 
Handlins contend, Black and White servants, heretofore treated alike,  each attained a different 
status. There are, however, important objections to this argument. First, the Handlins cannot 
adequately demonstrate that the White servants position was improving during and after the 
1660s; several acts of the Maryland and Vi rginia legislatures indicate otherwise. Another flaw in 
the Handlins interpretation is their assumption that prior to the establishment of legal slavery 
there was no discrimination against Black people. It is true that before the 1660s Black people 
were rarely called slaves. But this should not overshadow evidence from the 1630s on that 
points to racial discrimination without using the term slavery. Such discrimination sometimes 
stopped short of lifetime servitude or inherited status the two attributes o f true slavery yet in 
other cases it included both. The Handlins argument excludes the real possibility that Black 
people in the English colonies were never treated as the equals of White people.   GRE  423 
 This possibility has important ramifications. If from the o utset Black people were 
discriminated against, then legal slavery should be viewed as a reflection and an extension of 
racial prejudice rather than, as many historians including the Handlins have argued, the cause 
of prejudice. In addition, the existence o f discrimination before the advent of legal slavery 
offers a further explanation for the harsher treatment of Black slaves in North than in South 
America. Freyre and Tannenbaum have rightly argued that the lack of certain traditions in North 
America such a s a Roman conception of slavery and a Roman Catholic emphasis on 
equality explains why the treatment of Black slaves was more severe there than in the Spanish 
and Portuguese colonies of South America. But this cannot be the whole explanation since it is 
merely negative, based only on a lack of something. A more compelling explanation is that the 
early and sometimes extreme racial discrimination in the English colonies helped determine the 
particular nature of the slavery that followed.  
21. Which of the foll owing statements best describes the organization of lines 1 -8 of 
the passage?  
(A) A historical trend is sketched and an exception to that trend is cited.  
(B) Evidence for a historical irregularity is mentioned and a generalization from 
that evidence is adv anced.  
(C) A paradox about the origins of an institution is pointed out and the authors 
explanation of the paradox is expounded.  
(D) A statement about a historical phenomenon is offered and a possible 
misinterpretation of that statement is addressed.  
(E) An interpretation of the rise of an institution is stated and evidence for that 
interpretation is provided.  
22. Which of the following is the most logical inference to be drawn from the 
passage about the effects of several acts of the Maryland and  Virginia 
legislatures (lines 22 -23) passed during and after the 1660s?  
(A) The acts negatively affected the pre -1660s position of Black as well as of 
White servants.  
(B) The acts had the effect of impairing rather than improving the position of 
White s ervants relative to what it had been before the 1660s.  
(C) The acts had a different effect o n the position of White servants than did 
many of the acts passed during this time by the legislatures of other colonies.  
(D) The acts, at the very least, caused the position of White servants to remain no 
better than it had been before the 1660s.  
(E) The acts, at the very least, tended to reflect the attitudes toward Black 
servants that already existed before the 1660s.  
23. With which of the following stateme nts regarding the status of Black people in 
the English colonies of North America before the 1660s would the author be 
LEAST likely to agree?  
(A) Although Black people were not legally considered to be slaves, they were 
often called slaves.  424 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) Although s ubject to some discrimination, Black people had a higher legal 
status than they did after the 1660s.  
(C) Although sometimes subject to lifetime servitude, Black people were not 
legally considered to be slaves.  
(D) Although often not treated the same as Wh ite people, Black people, like many 
White people, possessed the legal status of servants.  
(E) Although apparently subject to more discrimination after 1630 than before 
1630, Black people from 1620 to the 1660s were legally considered to be 
servants.  
24. According to the passage, the Handlins have argued which of the following about 
the relationship between racial prejudice and the institution of legal slavery in the 
English colonies of North America?  
(A) Racial prejudice and the institution of slavery a rose simultaneously.  
(B) Racial prejudice most often took the form of the imposition of inherited status, 
one of the attributes of slavery.  
(C) The source of racial prejudice was the institution of slavery.  
(D) Because of the influence of the Roman Catholi c church, racial prejudice 
sometimes did not result in slavery.  
(E) Although existing in a lesser form before the 1660s, racial prejudice 
increased sharply after slavery was legalized.  
25. The passage suggests that the existence of a Roman conception o f slavery in 
Spanish and Portuguese colonies had the effect of  
(A) extending rather than causing racial prejudice in these colonies  
(B) hastening the legalization of slavery in these colonies  
(C) mitigating some of the conditions of slavery for Black peopl e in these 
colonies  
(D) delaying the introduction of slavery into the English colonies  
(E) bringing about an improvement in the treatment of Black slaves in the English 
colonies  
26. The author considers the explanation put forward by Freyre and Tannenbaum for 
the treatment accorded Black slaves in the English colonies of North America to  
be 
(A) ambitious but misguided  
(B) valid but limited  
(C) popular but suspect  
(D) anachronistic and controversial  
(E) premature and illogical  
27. With which of the following statements regarding  the reason for the introduction 
of legal slavery in the  English colonies of North America would the author be  GRE  425 
 most likely to agree?  
(A) The introduction is partly to be explained by reference to the origins of 
slavery, before the 1660 s, in the Spanish and Portuguese colonies.  
(B) The introduction is to be explai ned by reference to a growing consensus 
beginning in the 1630 s about what were the attributes of true slavery.  
(C) The introduction is more likely to be explained by reference to a decline than 
to an improvement in the position of White servants in the co lonies during 
and after the 1660 s. 
(D) The introduction is more likely to be explained by reference to the position of 
Black servants in the colonies in the 1630 s than by reference to their 
position in the 1640 s and 1650 s. 
(E) The introduction is mo re likely to be explained by reference to the history of 
Black people in the colonies before 1660 than by reference to the improving 
position of White servants during and after the 1660 s. 
No. 8 -1 
SECTION A  
Geologists have long known that the Earth s mantl e is heterogeneous, but its spatial 
arrangement remains unresolved is the mantle essentially layered or irregularly 
heterogeneous? The best evidence for the layered mantle thesis is the well -established fact that 
volcanic rocks found on oceanic islands, is lands believed to result from mantle plumes  arising 
from the lower mantle, are composed of material fundamentally different from that of the 
midocean ridge system, whose source, most geologists contend, is the upper mantle.  
Some geologists, however, o n the basis of observations concerning mantle xenoliths, argue 
that the mantle is not layered, but that heterogeneity is created by fluids rich in incompatible 
elements  (elements tending toward liquid rather than solid state) percolating upward and 
transforming portions of the upper mantle irregularly, according to the vagaries of the fluids  
pathways. We believe, perhaps unimaginatively, that this debate can be resolved through 
further study, and that the underexplored midocean ridge system is the key.  
17. Which of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Current theories regarding the structure of the Earth s mantle cannot account 
for new discoveries regarding the composition of mantle xenoliths.  
(B) There are conflicting hypotheses  about the heterogeneity of the Earth s 
mantle because few mantle elements have been thoroughly studied.  
(C) Further research is needed to resolve the debate among geologists over the 
composition of the midocean ridge system.  
(D) There is clear -cut disagre ement within the geological community over the 
structure  of the Earth s mantle.  
(E) There has recently been a strong and exciting challenge to geologists  426 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 long-standing belief in the heterogeneity of the Earth s mantle.  
18. According to the passage, it is believed that oceanic islands are formed from  
(A) the same material as mantle xenoliths  
(B) the same material as the midocean ridge system  
(C) volcanic rocks from the upper mantle  
(D) incompatible elements percolating up from the lower mantle  
(E) mantle plumes arising from the lower mantle  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that the supporters of the layered -mantle  
theory believe which of the following?  
I. The volcanic rocks on oceanic islands are composed of material derived 
from the lower par t of the mantle.  
II. The materials of which volcanic rocks on oceanic islands and midocean 
ridges are composed are typical of the layers from which they are thought to 
originate.  
III. The differences in composition between volcanic rocks on oceanic islands  
and the midocean ridges are a result of different concentrations of 
incompatible elements.  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
20. The authors suggest that their proposal for determining the nature of the ma ntles 
heterogeneity might be considered by many to be  
(A) pedestrian  
(B) controversial  
(C) unrealistic  
(D) novel  
(E) paradoxical  
Many literary detectives have pored over  a great puzzle concerning the writer Marcel 
Proust: what happened in 190 9? How did Contre Saint -Beuve , an essay attacking the methods 
of the critic Saint Beuve, turn into the start of the novel Remembrance of Things Past ? A 
recently published letter from Proust to the editor Vallette confirms that Fallois, the editor of the 
1954 edition of Contre Saint -Beuve , made an essentially correct guess about the relationship of 
the essay to the novel. Fallois proposed that Proust had tried to begin a novel in 1908, 
abandoned it for what was to be a long demonstration of Saint -Beuves bli ndness to the real 
nature of great writing, found the essay giving rise to personal memories and fictional 
developments, and allowed these to take over in a steadily developing novel.  
Draft passages in Prousts 1909 notebooks indicate that the transition f rom essay to novel  GRE  427 
 began in Contre Saint -Beuve , when Proust introduced several examples to show the powerful 
influence that involuntary memory exerts over the creative imagination. In effect, in trying to 
demonstrate that the imagination is more profound a nd less submissive to the intellect than 
Saint-Beuve assumed, Proust elicited vital memories of his own and, finding subtle connections 
between them, began to amass the material for Remembrance . By August, Proust was writing 
to Vallette, informing him of h is intention to develop the material as a novel. Maurice Bardeche, 
in Marcel Proust, romancier , has shown the importance in the drafts of Remembrance  of 
spontaneous and apparently random associations of Prousts subconscious. As incidents and 
reflections o ccurred to Proust, he continually inserted new passages altering and expanding his 
narrative. But he found it difficult to control the drift of his inspiration. The very richness and 
complexity of the meaningful relationships that kept presenting and rearr anging themselves on 
all levels, from abstract intelligence to profound dreamy feelings, made it difficult for Proust to 
set them out  coherently. The beginning of control came when he saw how to connect the 
beginning and the end of his novel.  
Intrigued by Prousts claim that he had begun and finished Remembrance  at the same 
time, Henri Bonnet discovered that parts of Remembrances  last bo ok were actually started in 
1909. Already in that year, Proust had drafted descriptions of his novels characters in their old 
age that would appear in the final book of Remembrance , where the permanence of art is set 
against the ravages of time. The lette r to Vallette, drafts of the essay and novel, and Bonnets 
researches establish in broad outline the process by which Proust generated his novel out of the 
ruins of his essay. But those of us who hoped, with Kolb, that Kolbs newly published complete 
edition of Prousts correspondence for 1909 would document the process in greater detail are 
disappointed. For until Proust was confident that he was at last in sight of a viable structure for 
Remembrance , he told few correspondents that he was producing anythi ng more ambitious 
than Contre Saint -Beuve.  
21. The passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) the role of involuntary memory in Prousts writing  
(B) evidence concerning the genesis of Prousts novel Remembrance of Things 
Past 
(C) conflicting scholarly opinion s about the value of studying the drafts of 
Remembrance of Things Past  
(D) Prousts correspondence and what it reveals about Remembrance of Things 
Past 
(E) the influence of Saint -Beuves criticism on Prousts novel Remembrance of 
Things Past  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that all of the following are literary detectives 
who have tried, by means of either scholarship or criticism, to help sol ve the 
great puzzle mentioned in lines 1 -2 EXCEPT:  
(A) Bardeche  
(B) Bonnet  
(C) Fallois  428 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) Kolb  
(E) Vallette  
23. According to the passage, in drafts of Contre Saint  Beuve  Proust set out to show 
that Saint -Beuve made which of the following mistakes as a critic?  
I. Saint -Beuve made no effort to study the development of a novel through its 
drafts and revisions.  
II. Saint -Beuve assigned too great a role in the creative process to a writers 
conscious intellect.  
III. Saint -Beuve concentrated too much on plo ts and not enough on imagery and 
other elements of style.  
(A) II only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) I and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
24. Which of the following best states the authors attitude toward the information 
that scholars have gathered about Prousts writing in 1909?  
(A) The author is disappointed that no new documents have come to light since 
Falloiss s peculations.  
(B) The author is dissatisfied because there are too many gaps and inconsistencies 
in the drafts.  
(C) The author is confident that Falloiss 1954 guess has been proved largely 
correct, but regrets that still more detailed documentation concern ing 
Prousts transition from the essay to the novel has not emerged.  
(D) The author is satisfied that Falloiss judgment was largely correct, but feels 
that Prousts early work in designing and writing the novel was probably far 
more deliberate than Falloi ss description of the process would suggest.  
(E) The author is satisfied that the facts of Prousts life in 1909 have been 
thoroughly established, but believes such documents as drafts and 
correspondence are only of limited value in a critical assessme nt of Prousts 
writing.  
25. The author of the passage implies that which of the following would be the 
LEAST useful source of information about Prousts transition from working on 
Contre Saint -Beuve  to having a viable structure for Remembrance of Things Pa st? 
(A) Falloiss comments in the 1954 edition of Contre Saint -Beuve  
(B) Prousts 1909 notebooks, including the drafts of Remembrance of Things Past  
(C) Prousts 1909 correspondence, excluding the letter to Vallette  
(D) Bardeches Marcel Proust, romancier  
(E) Bonnets researches concerning Prousts drafts of the final book of  GRE  429 
 Remembrance of Things Past  
26. The passage offers information to answer which of the following questions?  
(A) Precisely when in 1909 did Proust decide to abandon Contre Saint -Beuve ? 
(B) Precisely when in 1909 did Proust decide to connect the beginning and the 
end of Remembrance of Things Past ? 
(C) What was the subject of the novel that Proust attempted in 1908?  
(D) What specific criticisms of Saint -Beuve appear, in fictional form, i n 
Remembrance of Things Past ? 
(E) What is a theme concerning art that appears in the final book of 
Remembrance of Things Past ? 
27. Which of the following best describes the relationship between Contre 
Saint -Beuve  and Remembrance of Things Past as it is explained in the passage?  
(A) Immediately after abandoning Contre Saint -Beuve , at Vallettes suggestion, 
Proust started Remembrance  as a fictional demonstration that Saint -Beuve 
was wrong about the imagination.  
(B) Immediately after abandoning Contre Saint -Beuve , at Vallettes suggest ion, 
Proust turned his attention to  Remembrance , starting with incidents that had 
occurred to him while planning the essay.  
(C) Despondent that he could not find a coherent structure for Contre Saint -Beuve , 
an essay about the role of memory in fiction, Pro ust began instead to write 
Remembrance , a novel devoted to important early memories.  
(D) While developing his argument about the imagination in Contre Saint -Beuve , 
Proust described and began to link together personal memories that became 
a foundation for  Remembrance . 
(E) While developing his argument about memory and imagination in  Contre 
Saint -Beuve, Proust created fictional characters to embody the abstract 
themes in his essay.  
SECTION B 
Traditional research has confronted only Mexican and United States interpret ations of 
Mexican -American culture. Now we must also examine the culture as we Mexican Americans 
have experienced it, passing from a sovereign people to compatriots with newly arriving settlers 
to, finally, a conquered people a charter  minority on our own land.  
When the Spanish first came to Mexico, they intermarried with and absorbed the culture of 
the indigenous Indians. This policy of colonization t hrough acculturation was continued when 
Mexico acquired Texas in the early 1800 s and brought the indigenous Indians into Mexican life 
and government. In the 1820 s, United States citizens migrated to Texas, attracted by land 
suitable for cotton. As their numbers became more substantial, their policy of acquiring land by 
subduing native populations began to dominate. The two ideologies clashed repeatedly, 
culminating in a military conflict that led to victory for the United States. Thus, suddenly 430 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 deprived o f our parent culture, we had to evolve uniquely Mexican -American modes of thought 
and action in order to survive.  
17. The author s purpose in writing this passage is primarily to  
(A) suggest the motives behind Mexican and United States intervention in Texa s 
(B) document certain early objectives of Mexican -American society  
(C) provide a historical perspective for a new analysis of Mexican -American 
culture  
(D) appeal to both Mexican and United States scholars to give greater 
consideration to economic interpre tations of history  
(E) bring to light previously overlooked research on Mexican Americans  
18. The author most probably uses the phrase charter minority  (lines 6 -7) to 
reinforce the idea that Mexican Americans  
(A) are a native rather than an immigrant group in the United States  
(B) played an active political role when Texas first became part of the United 
States  
(C) recognized very early in the nineteenth century the need for official 
confirmation of their rights of citizenship  
(D) have been misundersto od by scholars trying to interpret their culture  
(E) identify more closely with their Indian heritage than with their Spanish 
heritage  
19. According to the passage, a major difference between the colonization policy of 
the United States and that of Mexico in Texas in the 1800 s was the  
(A) degree to which policies were based on tradition  
(B) form of economic interdependency between different cultural groups  
(C) number of people who came to settle new areas  
(D) treatment of the native inhabitants  
(E) relationship between the military and the settler s 
20. Which of the following statements most clearly contradicts the information in this 
passage?  
(A) In the early 1800 s, the Spanish committed more resources to settling 
California than to developing Texas.  
(B) While Texas was under Mexican control, the population of Texas quadrupled, 
in spite of the fact that Mexico discouraged immigration from the United 
States.  
(C) By the time Mexico acquired Texas, many Indians had already married people 
of Spanish heritage.  
(D) Many Mexicans living in Texas returned to Mexico after Texas was annexed 
by the United States.   GRE  431 
 (E) Most Indians living in Texas resisted Spanish acculturation and were either 
killed or enslaved.  
This passage was adapted from an article published in 1982.  
Until about five years ago, the very idea that peptide  hormones might be made anywhere 
in the brain besides  the hypothalamus was astounding. Peptide hormones,  scientists thought, 
were made by endocrine glands and  the hypothalamus was thought to be the brains  only 
endocrine g land. What is more, because peptide hormones cannot cross the blood -brain barrier, 
researchers  believed that they never got to any part of the brain  other than the hypothalamus, 
where they were simply  produced and then released into the bloodstream.  
But th ese beliefs about peptide hormones were questioned as laboratory after laboratory 
found that antiserums to peptide hormones, when injected into the  brain, bind in places other 
than the hypothalamus, indicating that either the hormones or substances that cr oss-react with 
the antiserums are present. The immunological method of detecting peptide hormones by 
means  of antiserums, however, is imprecise. C ross-reactions  are possible and this method 
cannot determine whether  the substances detected by the antiserums  really are the  hormones, 
or merely close relatives. Furthermore, this  method cannot be used to determine the location in  
the body where the detected substances are actually  produced.  
New techniques of molecular biology, however, provide a way to answer th ese questions. It 
is possible to  make specific complementary DNA s (cDNA s) that  can serve as molecular probes 
to seek out the messenger  RNAs (mRNA s) of the peptide hormones.  If brain cells  are making 
the hormones, the cells will contain these  mRNA s. If the products the brain cells make 
resemble  the hormones but are not identical to them, then the  cDNA s should still bind to these 
mRNA s, but should  not bind as tightly as they would to mRNA s for the  true hormones. The cells 
containing these mRNA s can then be isolated and their mRNA s decoded to determine just what 
their protein products are and how  closely the products resemble the true peptide hormones.  
The molecular approach to detecting peptide hormones using cDNA probes should also be 
much faster  than the immunological method because it can take  years of tedious purifications 
to isolate peptide hormones and then develop antiserums to them. Roberts,  expressing the 
sentiment of many researchers, states:  I was trained as an endocrinologist. But it beca me 
clear to me that the field of endocrinology needed  molecular biology input. The process of 
grinding  out protein p urifications  is just too slow.  
If, as the initial tests with cDNA probes suggest,  peptide hormones really are made in the 
brain in areas  other than the hypothalamus, a theory must be developed that explains their 
function in the brain. Some  have suggested that the hormones are all growth regulators, but 
Rosen s work on rat brains indicates that this  cannot be true. A number of other researche rs 
propose  that they might be used for intercellular communication in the brain.  
21. Which of the following titles best summarizes the passage?  
(A) Is Molecular Biology the Key to Understanding  Intercellular Communication 
in the Brain?  
(B) Molecular Biolog y: Can Researchers Exploit Its Techniques to Synthesize 
Peptide Hormones?  
(C) The Advantages and Disadvantages of the Immunological Approach to 432 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Detecting Peptide Hormones  
(D) Peptide Hormones: How Scientists Are Attempting to Solve Problems of 
Their Detect ion and to Understand Their Function  
(E) Peptide Hormones: The Role Played by Messenger RNA s in Their Detection  
22. The passage suggests that a substance detected in the brain by use of antiserums 
to peptide hormones may  
(A) have been stored in the bra in for a long period of time  
(B) play no role in the functioning of the brain  
(C) have been produced in some part of the body other than the brain  
(D) have escaped detection by molecular methods  
(E) play an important role in the functioning of the hypot halamus  
23. According to the passage, confirmation of the belief that peptide hormones are 
made in the brain in areas other than the hypothalamus would force scientists to  
(A) reject the theory that peptide hormones are made by endocrine glands  
(B) revise their beliefs about the ability of antiserums to detect peptide hormones  
(C) invent techniques that would allow them to locate accurately brain cells that 
produce peptide hormones  
(D) search for techniques that would enable them to distinguish peptide horm ones 
from their close relatives  
(E) develop a theory that explains the role played by peptide hormones in the 
brain  
24. Which of the following is mentioned in the passage as a drawback of the 
immunological method of detecting peptide hormones?  
(A) It cannot be used to detect the presence of growth regulators in the brain.  
(B) It cannot distinguish between the peptide hormones and substances that are 
very similar to them.  
(C) It uses antiserums that are unable to cross the blood -brain barrie r. 
(D) It involves a purification process that requires extensive training in 
endocrinology.  
(E) It involves injecting foreign substances directly into the bloodstream.  
25. The passage implies that, in doing research on rat brains, Rosen discovered that  
(A) peptide hormones are used for intercellular communication  
(B) complementary DNA s do not bind to cells producing peptide hormones  
(C) products closely resembling peptide hormones are not identical to peptide 
hormones  
(D) some peptide hormones do not f unction as growth regulators  
(E) antiserums cross -react with substances that are not peptide hormones   GRE  433 
 26. Which of the following is a way in which the immunological method of detecting 
peptide hormones differs from the molecular method?  
(A) The immunological method uses substances  that react with products of 
hormone -producing cells, whereas the molecular method uses substances 
that react with a specific component of the cells themselves.  
(B) The immunological method has produced results consistent with long -held 
beliefs about pepti de hormones, whereas the molecular method has produced 
results that upset these beliefs.  
(C) The immunological method requires a great deal of expertise, whereas the 
molecular method has been used successfully by nonspecialists.  
(D) The immunological metho d can only be used to test for the presence of 
peptide hormones within the hypothalamus, whereas the molecular method 
can be used throughout the brain.  
(E) The immunological method uses probes that can only bind with peptide 
hormones, whereas the molecu lar method uses probes that bind with peptide 
hormones and substances similar to them.  
27. The idea that the field of endocrinology can gain from developments in molecular 
biology is regarded by Roberts with  
(A) incredulity  
(B) derision  
(C) indifference  
(D) pride  
(E) enthusiasm  
No. 8 -2 
SECTION A  
Ragtime is a musical form that synthesizes folk melodies and musical techniques into a 
brief quadrille -like structure, designed to be played exactly as written on the piano. A strong 
analogy exists between European comp osers like Ralph Vaughan Williams, Edvard Grieg, and 
Anton Dvorak who combined folk tunes and their own original materials in larger compositions 
and the pioneer ragtime composers in the United States. Composers like Scott Joplin and James 
Scott were in a sense collectors or musicologists, collecting dance and folk music in Black 
communities and consciously shaping it into brief suites or anthologies called piano rags.  
It has sometimes been charged that ragtime is mechanical. For instance, Wilfred Mellers 
comments, rags were transferred to the pianola roll and, even if not played by a machine, 
should be played like a machine, with meticulous precision.  However, there is no reason to 
assume that ragtime is inherently mechanical simply because commercial man ufacturers 
applied a mechanical recording method to ragtime, the only way to record pianos at that date. 
Ragtime s is not a mechanical precision, and it is not precision limited to the style of 434 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 performance. It arises from ragtime s following a well -defined  form and obeying simple rules 
within that form.  
The classic formula for the piano rag disposes three to five themes in sixteen -bar strains, 
often organized with repeats. The rag opens with a bright, memorable strain or theme, followed 
by a similar theme, leading to a trio of marked lyrical character, with the structure concluded by 
a lyrical strain that parallels the rhythmic developments of the earlier themes. The aim of the 
structure is to rise from one theme to another in a stair -step manner, ending on a note of 
triumph or exhilaration. Typically, each strain is divided into two 8 -bar segments that are 
essentially alike, so the rhythmic -melodic unit of ragtime is only eight bars of 2/4 measure. 
Therefore, themes must be brief with clear, sharp melodic fi gures. Not concerned with 
development of musical themes, the ragtime composer instead sets a theme down intact, in 
finished form, and links it to various related themes. Tension in ragtime compositions arises 
from a polarity between two basic ingredients: a continuous bass called by jazz musicians a 
boom -chick bass in the pianist s left hand, and its melodic, syncopated counterpart in the right 
hand.  
Ragtime remains distinct from jazz both as an instrumental style and as a genre. Ragtime 
style stresses a pa ttern of repeated rhythms, not the constant inventions and variations of jazz. 
As a genre, ragtime requires strict attention to structure, not inventiveness or virtuosity. It 
exists as a tradition, a set of conventions, a body of written scores, separate f rom the individual 
players associated with it. In this sense ragtime is more akin to folk music of the nineteenth 
century than to jazz.  
17. Which of the following best describes the main purpose of the passage?  
(A) To contrast ragtime music and jazz  
(B) To acknowledge and counter significant adverse criticisms of ragtime music  
(C) To define ragtime music as an art form and describe its structural 
characteristics  
(D) To review the history of ragtime music and analyze ragtime s effect on 
listeners  
(E) To explore the similarities between ragtime music and certain European 
musical compositions  
18. According to the passage, each of the following is a characteristic of ragtime 
compositions that follow the classic ragtime formula EXCEPT:  
(A) syncopat ion 
(B) well-defined melodic figures  
(C) rising rhythmic -melodic intensity  
(D) full development of musical themes  
(E) a bass line distinct from the melodic line  
19. According to the passage, Ralph Vaughan Williams, Anton Dvorak, and Scott 
Joplin are sim ilar in that they all  
(A) conducted research into musicological history   GRE  435 
 (B) wrote original compositions based on folk tunes  
(C) collected and recorded abbreviated piano suites  
(D) created intricate sonata -like musical structures  
(E) explored the relatio ns between Black music and continental folk music  
20. The author rejects the argument that ragtime is a mechanical music because that 
argument  
(A) overlooks the precision required of the ragtime player  
(B) does not accurately describe the sound of ragtime pianola music  
(C) confuses the means of recording and the essential character of the music  
(D) exaggerates the influence of the performance style of professional ragtime 
players on the reputation of the genre  
(E) improperly identifies commercial ragtime music with the subtler classic 
ragtime style  
21. It can be inferred that the author of the passage believes that the most important 
feature of ragtime music is its  
(A) commercial success  
(B) formal structure  
(C) emotional range  
(D) improvisational opportunities  
(E) role as a forerunner of jazz  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that the essential nature of ragtime has been 
obscured by commentaries based on  
(A) the way ragtime music was first recorded  
(B) interpretations of ragtime by jazz musicians  
(C) the dance fashions that were contemporary with ragtime  
(D) early reviewers  accounts of characteristic structure  
(E) the musical sources used by Scott Joplin and James Scott  
23. Which of the following  is most nearly analogous in source and artistic character 
to a ragtime composition as described in the passage?  
(A) Symphonic music derived from complex jazz motifs  
(B) An experimental novel based on well -known cartoon characters  
(C) A dramatic production  in which actors invent scenes and improvise lines  
(D) A ballet whose disciplined choreography is based on folk -dance steps  
(E) A painting whose abstract shapes evoke familiar objects in a natural landscape  
Echolocating bats emit sounds in patterns characteristic of each species that contain 
both frequency -modulated (FM) and constant -frequency (CF) signals. The broadband FM  
signals and the narrowband CF signals travel out to a target, reflect from it, and return to the 
hunting bat. In this process of transmission and reflection, the sounds are changed, and the 436 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 changes in the echoes enable the bat to perceive features of the target.  
The FM signals report information about target characteristics that modify the timing and 
the fine frequency structure, or spectrum, of echoes for example, the targets size, shape, 
texture, surface structure, and direction in space. Because of the ir narrow bandwidth, CF 
signals portray only the targets presence and, in the case of some bat species, its motion 
relative to the bats. Responding to changes in the CF echos frequency, bats of some species 
correct in flight for the direction and veloci ty of their moving prey.  
24. According to the passage, the information provided to the bat by CF echoes 
differs from that provided by FM echoes in which of the following ways?  
(A) Only CF echoes alert the bat to moving targets.  
(B) Only CF echoes identify the range of widely spaced targets.  
(C) Only CF echoes report the targets presence to the bat.  
(D) In some species, CF echoes enable the bat to judge whether it is closing in on 
its target.  
(E) In some species, CF echoes enable the bat to discriminate the size of its target 
and the direction in which the target is moving.  
25. According to the passage, the configuration of the target is reported to the 
echolocating bat by changes in the  
(A) echo spectrum of CF signals  
(B) echo spectrum of FM signals  
(C) direction and velocity of the FM echoes  
(D) delay between transmission and reflection of the CF signals  
(E) relative frequencies of the FM and the CF echoes  
26. The author presents the information concerning bat sonar in a manner that could 
be best described as  
(A) argumentative  
(B) commendatory  
(C) critical  
(D) disbelieving  
(E) objective  
27. Which of  the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A fact is stated, a process is outlined, and specific details of the process are 
described.  
(B) A fact is stated, and examples suggesting that a distinction needs correction 
are considered.  
(C) A fact is stated, a theory is presented to explain that fact, and additional facts 
are introduced to validate the theory.  
(D) A fact is stated, and two theories are compared in light of their explanations  GRE  437 
 of this fact.  
(E) A fact is stated, a process is described, and examples of still another process 
are illustrated in detail.  
SECTION B 
The social sciences are less likely than other intellectual enterprises to get credit for  their 
accompl ishments. Arguably, this is so because the theories and conceptual constructs of the 
social sciences are especially accessible: human intelligence apprehends truths about human 
affairs with particular facility . And the discoveries of th e social sciences, once isolated and 
labeled, are quickly absorbed into conventional wisdom, whereupon  they lose their 
distinctiveness as scientific advances.  
This underappreciation of the social sciences contrasts oddly with what m any see as their 
overutilization. Game theory is pressed into service  in studies of shifting international alliances. 
Evaluation research is called upon to demonstrate successes or failures of social programs. 
Models from econo mics and demography become the definitive tools for examining the 
financial base of social security. Yet this rush into practical applications is itself quite 
understandable: public policy must continually be made, and policymakers rightly feel that even 
tentative findings and untested theories are better guides to decision -making than no findings 
and no theories at all.  
17. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) advocating a more modest view, and less widespread utilization, of the social 
sciences  
(B) analyzing the mechanisms for translating discoveries into applications in the 
social sciences  
(C) dissolving the air of paradox inherent in human beings studying themselves  
(D) explaining a peculiar dilemma that the social sciences are in  
(E) maintainin g a strict separation between pure and applied social science  
18. Which of the following is a social science discipline that the author mentions as 
being possibly overutilized?  
(A) Conventional theories of social change  
(B) Game theory  
(C) Decision -making theory  
(D) Economic theories of international alliances  
(E) Systems analysis  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that, when speaking of the overutilization 
(line 11) of the social sciences, the author is referring to the  
(A) premature practical application of social science advances  
(B) habitual relia nce on the social sciences even where common sense would 
serve equally well  438 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) practice of bringing a greater variety of social science disciplines to bear on a 
problem than the nature of the problem warrants  
(D) use of social science constructs by people  who do not fully understand them  
(E) tendency on the part of social scientists to recast everyday truths in social 
science jargon  
20. The author confronts the claim that the social sciences are being overutilized with  
(A) proof that overextensions of social science results are self -correcting  
(B) evidence that some public policy is made without any recourse to social 
science findings or theories  
(C) a long list of social science applications that are perfectly appropriate and 
extremely fruitful  
(D) the argument that overutilization is by and large the exception rather than the 
rule 
(E) the observation that this practice represents the lesser of two evils under 
existing circumstances  
The term Ice Age may give a wrong impression. The epoch that geologists know as the 
Pleistocene and that spanned the 1.5 to 2.0 million years prior  to the current geologic epoch 
was not one long continuous glaciation, but a period of oscillating climate with ice advances 
punctuated by times of interglacial climate not very different from the climate experienced now. 
Ice sheets that derived from an ice cap centered on northern Scandinavia reached southward to 
Central Europe. And Beyond the margins of th e ice sheets, climatic oscillations affected most of 
the rest of the world; for example, in the deserts, periods of wetter conditions (pluvials) 
contrasted with drier, interpluvial periods. Although the time involved is so short, about 0.04 
percent of the total age of the Earth, the amount of attention devoted to the Pleistocene has 
been incredibly large, probably because of its immediacy, and because the epoch largely 
coincides with the appearance on Earth of humans and their immediate ancestors.  
There is no reliable way of dating much of the Ice Age. Geological dates are usually 
obtained by using the rates of decay of various radioactive elements found in minerals. Some of 
these rates are suitable for very old rocks but involve increasing errors when used for young 
rocks; others are suitable for very young rocks and errors increase rapidly in older rocks. Most 
of the Ice Age spans a period of time for which no element has an appropriate decay rate.  
Nevertheless, researchers of the Pleistocene epoch have dev eloped all sorts of  more or less 
fanciful model schemes of how they would have arranged the Ice Age had they been in charge 
of events. For example, an early classification of Alpine glaciation suggested the existence there 
of four glac iations, named the Gunz, Mindel, Riss, and Wurm. This succession was based 
primarily on a series of deposits and events not directly related to glacial and interglacial 
periods, rather than on the more usual modern method of studying biological remains fou nd in 
interglacial beds themselves interstratified within glacial deposits. Yet this succession was 
forced willy -nilly onto the glaciated parts of Northern Europe, where there are partial 
successions of true glacial ground moraines and interglacial deposit s, with hopes of ultimately 
piecing them together to provide a complete Pleistocene succession. Eradication of the Alpine 
nomenclature is still proving a Herculean task .  GRE  439 
 There is no conclusive evidence about the relati ve length, complexity, and temperatures of 
the various glacial and interglacial periods. We do not know whether we live in a postglacial 
period or an interglacial period. The chill truth seems to be that we are already past the 
optimum climate of postglaci al time. Studies of certain fossil distributions and of the pollen of 
certain temperate plants suggest decreases of a degree or two in both summer and winter 
temperatures and, therefore, that we may be in the declining climatic phase leading to 
glaciation and extinction.  
21. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) searching for an accurate method of dating the Pleistocene epoch  
(B) discussing problems involved in providing an accurate picture of the 
Pleistocene epoch  
(C) declaring opposit ion to the use of the term Ice Age for the Pleistocene 
epoch  
(D) criticizing fanciful schemes about what happened in the Pleistocene epoch  
(E) refuting the idea that there is no way to tell if we are now living in an Ice Age  
22. The wrong impression (line 1) to which the author refers is the idea that the  
(A) climate of the Pleistocene epoch was not very different from the climate we 
are now experiencing  
(B) climate of the Pleistocene epoch was composed of periods of violent storms  
(C) Pleistocene epoch consisted of very wet, cold periods mixed with very day, 
hot periods  
(D) Pleistocene epoch comprised one period of continuous glaciation  during 
which Northern Europe was covered with ice sheets  
(E) Pleistocene epoch had no long periods during which much of the Earth was 
covered by ice  
23. According to the passage, one of the reasons for the deficiencies of the early 
classification of Alpine glaciation (lines 32 -33) is that it was  
(A) derive d from evidence that was only tangentially related to times of actual 
glaciation  
(B) based primarily on fossil remains rather than on actual living organisms  
(C) an abstract, imaginative scheme of how the period might have been structured  
(D) based on unme thodical examinations of randomly chosen glacial biological 
remains  
(E) derived from evidence that had been haphazardly gathered from glacial 
deposits and inaccurately evaluated  
24. Which of the following does the passage imply about the early classification of 
Alpine glaciation (lines 32 -33)? 
(A) It should not have been applied as widely as it was.  
(B) It represents the best possible scientific practice, given the tools available at 440 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 the time.  
(C) It was a valuable tool, in its time, for measuring the length of the four periods 
of glaciation.  
(D) It could be useful, b ut only as a general guide to the events of the Pleistocene 
epoch.  
(E) It does not shed any light on the methods used at the time for investigating 
periods of glaciation.  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that an important result of producing an 
accurate chronology of events of the Pleistocene epoch would be a  
(A) clearer idea of the origin of the Earth  
(B) clearer picture of the Earth during the time that humans developed  
(C) clearer understanding of the reasons for the existence of deserts  
(D) more detailed understanding of how radioactive dating of minerals wo rks 
(E) firmer understanding of how the northern polar ice cap developed  
26. The author refers to deserts primarily in order to  
(A) illustrate the idea that an interglacial climate is marked by oscillations of wet 
and dry periods  
(B) illustrate the idea th at what happened in the deserts during the Ice Age had 
far-reaching effects even on the ice sheets of Central and Northern Europe  
(C) illustrate the idea that the effects of the Ice Ages climatic variations extended 
beyond the areas of ice  
(D) support the  view that during the Ice Age sheets of ice covered some of the 
deserts of the world  
(E) support the view that we are probably living in a postglacial period  
27. The author would regard the idea that we are living in an interglacial period as  
(A) unimportant  
(B) unscientific  
(C) self -evident  
(D) plausible  
(E) absurd  
No. 8 -3 
SECTION A 
(This passage is excerpted from an article that was published in 1981.)  
The deep sea typically has a sparse fauna dominated by tiny worms and crustaceans, with 
an even sparser distribution of larger animals. However, near hydrothermal  vents, areas of the 
ocean where warm water emerges from subterranean sources, live remarkable densities of  GRE  441 
 huge clams, blind crabs, and fish.  
Most deep -sea faunas rely for food on particulate matter , ultimately derived from 
photosynthesis, falling from above. The food supplies necessary to sustain the large vent 
communities, however, must be many times the ordinary fallout. The first reports describing 
vent faunas proposed two possible sources of nutrition: bacterial che mosynthesis, production 
of food by bacteria using energy derived from chemical changes, and advection, the drifting of 
food materials from surrounding regions. Later, evidence in support of the idea of intense local 
chemosynthesis was accumulated: hydrogen  sulfide was found in vent water; many vent -site 
bacteria were found to be capable of chemosynthesis; and extremely large concentrations of 
bacteria were found in samples of vent water thought to be pure. This final observation seemed 
decisive. If such ast onishing concentrations of bacteria were typical of vent outflow, then food 
within the vent would dwarf any contribution from advection. Hence, the widely quoted 
conclusion was reached that bacterial chemosynthesis provides the foundation for 
hydrothermal -vent food chains an exciting prospect because no other communities on Earth 
are independent of photosynthesis.  
There are, however, certain difficulties with this interpretation. For example, some of the 
large sedentary organisms associated with vents are a lso found at ordinary deep -sea 
temperatures many meters from the nearest hydrothermal sources. This suggests that bacterial 
chemosynthesis is not a sufficient source of nutrition for these creatures. Another difficulty is 
that similarly dense populations o f large deep -sea animals have been found in the proximity of 
smokers vents  where water emerges at temperatures up to 350 . No bacteria  can survive 
such heat, and no bacteria were found there. Unless smokers are consistently located near 
more hospitable w arm-water vents, chemosynthesis can account for only a fraction of the vent 
faunas. It is conceivable, however, that these large, sedentary organisms do in fact feed on 
bacteria that grow in warm -water vents, rise in the vent water, and then rain in  peripheral areas 
to nourish animals living some distance from the warm -water vents.  
Nonetheless advection is a more likely alternative food source. Research has demonstrated 
that advective flow, which originates near the surface of the ocean wher e suspended 
particulate matter accumulates, transports some of that matter and water to the vents. 
Estimates suggest that for every cubic meter of  vent discharge, 350 milligrams of particulate 
organic material would be advected into the vent area. Thus, fo r an average -sized vent, 
advection could provide more than 30 kilograms of potential food per day. In addition, it is likely 
that small live animals in the advected water might  be killed or stunned by thermal and/or 
chemical shock, thereby contributing to the food supply of vents.  
16. The passage provides information for answering which of the following 
questions?  
(A) What causes warm -water vents to form?  
(B) Do vent faunas consume more than do deep -sea faunas of similar size?  
(C) Do bacteria live in the ve nt water of smokers?  
(D) What role does hydrogen sulfide  play in chemosynthesis?  
(E) What accounts for the locations of deep -sea smokers?  
17. The information in the passage suggests that the majority of deep -sea faunas that 442 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 live in nonvent habitats have which of the following characteristics?  
(A) They do  not normally feed on particles of food in the water.  
(B) They are smaller than many vent faunas.  
(C) They are predators.  
(D) They derive nutrition from a chemosynthetic  food source.  
(E) They congregate around a single main food source.  
18. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) describe a previously unknown natural phenomenon  
(B) reconstruct the evolution of a natural phenomenon  
(C) establish unequivocally the accuracy of a hypothesis  
(D) survey explanations for a natural phenomenon and determine which is best  
supported by evidence  
(E) entertain  criticism of the author s research and provide an effective response  
19. Which of the following does the author cite as a weakness in the argument that 
bacterial che mosynthesis provides the foundation for the food chains at deep -sea 
vents?  
(A) Vents are colonized by some of the same animals found in other  areas of the 
ocean floor.  
(B) Vent water does not contain sufficient quantities of hydrogen sulfide.  
(C) Bacteria cannot produce large quantities of food quickly enough.  
(D) Large concentrations of minerals are found in vent water.  
(E) Some bacteria found in the vents are incapable  of chemosynthesis.  
20. Which of the following is information supplied in the passage that would support 
the statement that the food supplies necessary to sustain vent communities must 
be many times tha t of ordinary fallout?  
I. Large vent faunas move from vent to vent in search of food.  
II. Vent faunas are not able to consume food produced by photosynthesis.  
III. Vents are more densely populated than are other deep -sea areas.  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
21. The author refers to smokers (line 38) most probably in order to  
(A) show how thermal shock can provide food for some vent faunas by stunning 
small animals  
(B) prove that the habitat of most deep -sea animals is limited to warm -water  GRE  443 
 vents  
(C) explain how bacteria carry out chemosynthesis  
(D) demonstrate how advection compensates for the lack of food sources on the 
seafloor  
(E) present evidence that bacterial chemosynthesis may be an inadequate source 
of food for some vent fau nas 
22. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about the particulate 
matter that is carried down from the surface of the ocean?  
(A) It is the basis of bacterial chemosynthesis in the vents.  
(B) It may provide an important source of nutriti on for vent faunas.  
(C) It may cause the internal temperature of the vents to change significantly.  
(D) It is transported as large aggregates of particles.  
(E) It contains hydrogen sulfide.  
Throughout human history there have been many stringent taboos concerning watching 
other people eat or eating in the presence of  others. There have been attempts to explain these 
taboos in  terms of inappropriate social relationships either between those who are involved and 
those who are not simultaneously involved in the satisfaction of a bodily need, or between 
those already satiated and those who appear to be shamelessly gorging. Undoubt edly such 
elements exist in the taboos, but there is an additional element with a much more fundamental 
importance. In prehistoric times, when food was so precious and the on -lookers so hungry, not 
to offer half of the little food one had was unthinkable, since every glance was a plea for life. 
Further, during those times, people existed in nuclear or extended family  groups, and the 
sharing of food was quite literally supporting ones family or, by extension, preservin g ones self.  
23. If the argument in the passage is valid, taboos against eating in the presence of 
others who are not also eating would be LEAST likely in a society that  
(A) had always had a plentiful supply of food  
(B) emphasized the need to share worldl y goods  
(C) had a nomadic rather than an agricultural way of life  
(D) emphasized the value of privacy  
(E) discouraged overindulgence  
24. The authors hypothesis concerning the origin of taboos against watching other 
people eat emphasizes the  
(A) general palatability of food  
(B) religious significance of food  
(C) limited availability of food  
(D) various  sources of food  
(E) nutritional value of food  
25. According to the passage, the author believes that past attempts to explain some 444 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 taboos concerning eating are  
(A) unimaginative  
(B) implausible  
(C) inelegant  
(D) incomplete  
(E) unclear  
26. In develop ing the main idea of the passage, the author does which of the 
following?  
(A) Downplays earlier attempts to explain the origins of a social prohibition.  
(B) Adapts a scientific theory and applies it to a spiritual relationship.  
(C) Simplifies a complex bio logical phenomenon by explaining it in terms of 
social needs.  
(D) Reorganizes a system designed to guide personal behavior.  
(E) Codifies earlier, unsystematized conjectures about family life.  
SECTION B 
(This passage is from a book published in 1975.)  
That Louise Nevelson is believed by many critics to be the greatest twentieth -century 
sculptor is all the more remarkable bec ause the greatest resistance to women artists has been, 
until recently, in the field of sculpture. Since Neolithic times, sculpture has been considered the 
prerogative of men, partly, perhaps, for purely physical reasons: it was erroneously assumed 
that wo men were not suited for the hard manual labor required in sculpting stone, carving 
wood, or working in metal. It has been only during the twentieth century that women sculptors 
have been recognized as major artists, and it has been in the United States, es pecially since the 
decades of the fifties and sixties, that women sculptors have shown the greatest originality and 
creative power. Their rise to prominence parallels the development of sculpture itself in the 
United States: while there had been a few tale nted sculptors in the United States before the 
1940s, it was only after 1945 when New York was rapidly becoming the art capital of the 
world that major sculpture was produced in the United States. Some of the best was the work 
of women.  
By far the most ou tstanding of these women is Louise Nevelson, who in the eyes of  many 
critics is the most original female artist alive today. One famous and influential critic, Hilton 
Kramer, said of her work,  For myself , I think Ms. Nevelson succeeds where the painters often 
fail. 
Her works have been compared to the Cubist constructions of Picasso, the Surrealistic 
objects of Miro, and the Merzbau of Schwitters. Nevelson would be the first to admit that she  
has been influenced by all of these, as well as by African sculpture, and by Native American and 
pre-Columbian art, but she has absorbed all these influences and still created a distinctive art 
that expresses the urban landscape and the aesthetic sensibil ity of the twentieth century. 
Nevelson says, I have always wanted to show the world that art is everywhere, except that it  GRE  445 
 has to pass through  a creative mind.  
Using mostly discarded wooden objects like packing crates, broken pieces of furniture, and 
abandoned architectural ornaments, all of which she has hoarded for years , she assembles 
architectural constructions  of great beauty and power. Creating very freely with no sketches, 
she glues and nails objects together, paints them black, or more rarely white or gold, and places 
them in boxes. These assemblages, walls, even entire environments create a mysterious, 
almost awe -inspiring atmosphere. Although she has denied any symbolic or religious intent in 
her works, their three -dimensional grandeur and even their titles, such as Sky Cathedral  and 
Night Cathedral , suggest such connotations. In some ways , her most ambitious works are 
closer to architecture than to traditional sculpture, but then neither Louise Nevelson nor her art 
fits into  any neat category.  
17. The passage focuses primarily on which of the following?  
(A) A general  tendency in twentieth -century art  
(B) The work of a particular artist  
(C) The artistic influences on women sculptors  
(D) Critical responses to twentieth -century sculpture  
(E) Materials used by twentieth -century sculptors  
18. Which of the following stat ements is supported by information given in the 
passage?  
(A) Since 1945 women sculptors in the United States have produced more 
sculpture than have men sculptors.  
(B) Since 1950 sculpture produced in the United States has been the most original 
and creativ e sculpture produced anywhere.  
(C) From 1900 to 1950 women sculptors in Europe enjoyed more recognition for 
their work than did women sculptors in the United States.  
(D) Prior to 1945 there were many women sculptors whose work was ignored by 
critics.  
(E) Prior to 1945 there was little major sculpture produced by men or women 
sculptors working in the United States.  
19. The author quotes Hilton Kramer in lines 25 -27 most probably in order to 
illustrate which of the following?  
(A) The realism of Nevel sons work  
(B) The unique qualities of Nevelsons style  
(C) The extent of critical approval of Nevelsons work  
(D) A distinction between sculpture and painting  
(E) A reason for the prominence of women sculptors since the 1950s  
20. Which of the followin g is one way in which Nevelsons art illustrates her theory 
as it is expressed in lines 36 -38? 
(A) She sculpts in wood rather than in metal or stone.  446 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) She paints her sculptures and frames them in boxes.  
(C) She makes no preliminary sketches but rather a llows the sculpture to develop 
as she works.  
(D) She puts together pieces of ordinary objects once used for different purposes 
to make her sculptures.  
(E) She does not deliberately attempt to convey symbolic or religious meanings 
through her sculpture.  
21. It can be inferred from the passage that the author believes which of the following 
about Nevelsons sculptures?  
(A) They suggest religious and sy mbolic meanings.  
(B) They do not have qualities characteristic of sculpture.  
(C) They are mysterious and awe -inspiring, but not beautiful.  
(D) They are uniquely American in style and sensibility.  
(E) They show the influence of twentieth -century architec ture. 
22. The author regards Nevelsons stature in the art world as remarkable (line 3) in 
part because of which of the following?  
(A) Her work is currently overrated.  
(B) Women sculptors have found it especially difficult to be accepted and 
recognized a s major artists.  
(C) Nevelsons sculptures are difficult to understand.  
(D) Many art critics have favored painting over sculpture in writing about 
developments in the art world.  
(E) Few of the artists prominent in the twentieth century have been sculptors.  
23. Which of the following statements about Nevelsons sculptures can be inferred 
from the passage?  
(A) They are meant for display outdoors.  
(B) They are often painted in se veral colors.  
(C) They are sometimes very large.  
(D) They are hand carved by Nevelson.  
(E) They are built around a central wooden object.  
Volcanic rock that forms as fluid lava chills rapidly is called pillow lava . This rapid chillin g 
occurs when lava erupts directly into water (or beneath ice) or when it flows across a shoreline 
and into a body of water. While the term pillow lava suggests a definite shape, in fact 
geologists disagree. Some geologists argue that pillow lava is char acterized by discrete, 
ellipsoidal masses. Others describe pillow lava as a tangled mass of cylindrical, interconnected 
flow lobes. Much of this controversy probably results from unwarranted extrapolations of the 
original configuration of pillow flows from  two-dimensional cross sections of eroded pillows in 
land outcroppings . Virtually any cross section  cut through a tangled mass of interconnected 
flow lobes would give the appearance of a pile of discret e ellipsoidal masses. Adequate  GRE  447 
 three-dimensional images of intact pillows are essential for defining the true geometry of 
pillowed flows and thus ascertaining their mode of origin. Indeed, the term pillow, itself 
suggestive of discrete masses, is probabl y a misnomer.  
24. Which of the following is a fact presented in the passage?  
(A) The shape of the connections between the separate, sacklike masses in pillow 
lava is unknown.  
(B) More accurate cross sections of pillow lava would reveal the mode of origin.  
(C) Water or ice is necessary for the formation of pillow lava.  
(D) No three -dimensional examples of intact pillows currently exist.  
(E) The origin of pillow lava is not yet known.  
25. In the passage, the author is primarily interested in  
(A) analyzing the source of a scientific controversy  
(B) criticizing some geologists methodology  
(C) pointing out the flaws in a geological study  
(D) proposing a new theory to explain existing scientific evidence  
(E) describing a physical phenomenon  
26. The author o f the passage would most probably agree that the geologists 
mentioned in line 6 (Some geologists) have made which of the following errors 
in reasoning?  
I. Generalized unjustifiably from available evidence.  
II. Deliberately ignored existing counterevidenc e. 
III. Repeatedly failed to take new evidence into account.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) I and II only  
(E) II and III only  
27. The author implies that the controversy (line 9) might be resolved if  
(A) geologists did not persist in using the term pillow  
(B) geologists did not rely on potentially misleading information  
(C) geologists were more willing  to confer directly with one another  
(D) two -dimensional cross sections of eroded pillows were available  
(E) existing pillows in land outcroppings were not so badly eroded  
No. 9 -1 
SECTION A  448 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Many critics of Emily Bronte s novel Wuthering Heights  see its second part as a 
counterpoint  that comments on, if it does not reverse, the first part, where a romantic  reading 
receives more confirmation. Seeing the two parts as a whole is encouraged by the novel s 
sophisticated structure, revealed in its complex use of narrators and time shifts. Granted that 
the presence of these elements need not argue an authorial awareness of novelistic 
construction comparable to that of Henry James, their presence does encourage att empts to 
unify the novel s heterogeneous parts. However, any interpretation that seeks to unify all of the 
novels diverse elements is bound to be somewhat unconvincing. This is not because such an 
interpretation necessarily stiffens into a thesis (althoug h rigidity in any interpretation of this or 
of any novel is always a danger), but because Wuthering Heights  has recalcitrant elements of 
undeniable power that, ultimately, resist inclusion in an all -encompassing interpretation. In this 
respect, Wuthering H eights  shares a feature of Hamlet.  
17. According to the passage, which of the following is a true statement about the 
first and second parts of Wuthering Heights ? 
(A) The second part has received more attention from critics.  
(B) The second part has little relation to the first part.  
(C) The second part annuls the force of the first part.  
(D) The second part provides less substantiation for a romantic  reading.  
(E) The second part is better because it is more realistic.  
18. Which of the following inferences about Henry James s awareness of novelistic 
construction is best supported by the passage?  
(A) James, more than any other novelist, was aware of the diffi culties of 
novelistic construction.  
(B) James was very aware of the details of novelistic construction.  
(C) James s awareness of novelistic construction derived from his reading of 
Bronte.  
(D) James s awareness of novelistic construction has led most comme ntators to 
see unity in his individual novels.  
(E) James s awareness of novelistic construction precluded him from violating the 
unity of his novels.  
19. The author of the passage would be most likely to agree that an interpretation of a 
novel should  
(A) not try to unite heterogeneous elements in t he novel  
(B) not be inflexible in its treatment of the elements in the novel  
(C) not argue that the complex use of narrators or of time shifts indicates a 
sophisticated structure  
(D) concentrate on those recalcitrant elements of the novel that are outside the 
novel s main structure  
(E) primarily consider those elements of novelistic construction of which the 
author of the novel was aware   GRE  449 
 20. The author of the passage suggests which of the following about Hamlet ? 
I. Hamlet  has usually attracted critical interpretations that tend t o stiffen into 
theses.  
II. Hamlet  has elements that are not amenable to an all -encompassing critical 
interpretation.  
III. Hamlet  is less open to an all -encompassing  critical interpretation than is 
Wuthering  Heights . 
IV . Hamlet  has not received a critical i nterpretation  that has been widely 
accepted by readers.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and IV only  
(D) III and IV only  
(E) I, II, and III only  
The determination of the sources of copper ore used in the manufacture of copper and 
bronze artifacts  of Bronze Age  civilizations would add greatly to our  knowledge of cultural 
contacts and trade in that er a. Researchers have analyzed artifacts and ores for their 
concentrations of elements, but for a variety of reasons,  these studies have generally failed to 
provide evidence of  the sources of the copper used in the objects. Elemental  composition can 
vary wit hin the same copper -ore lode, usually because of varying admixtures of other elements, 
especially iron, lead, zinc, and arsenic. And high concentrations of cobalt or zinc, noticed in 
some artifacts, appear in a variety of copper -ore sources. Moreover, the processing of ores 
introduced poorly controlled  changes in the concentrations of minor and trace elements in the 
resulting metal. Some elements evaporate  during smelting and roasting; different temperatures 
and processes produce different degrees of loss. Finally, flux, which is sometimes added during 
smelting to remove waste material from the ore, could add quantities of elements to the final 
product.  
An elemental property that is unchanged through  these chemical processes is the isotopic 
composition  of each metallic element in the ore. Isotopic composition, the percentages of the 
different isotopes of an element  in a given sample of the element, is therefore particularly 
suitable as an indicator of the sources of the ore. Of  course, for this purpose it is necessary to 
find an element  whose isotopic composition is more or less constant  throughout a given ore 
body, but varies from one copper  ore body to another or, at least, from one geographic  region 
to another.  
The ideal choice, when isotopic composition is  used to investigate the source of copper ore, 
would seem to  be copper itself. It has been shown that small but  measurable variations occur 
naturally in the isotopic  composition of copper. However, the variations are  large enough only in 
rare ores; between  samples of  the common ore minerals of copper, isotopic variations  greater 
than the measurement error have not been found. An alternative choice is lead, which occurs in 
most copper and bronze artifacts of the Bronze Age in amounts consistent with the lead  being 
derived from the copper ores and possibly from the fluxes. The isotopic composition of lead 
often varies from one source of common copper ore to another, with variations exceeding the 450 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 measurement error; and preliminary  studies indicate virtually uni form is otopic composition  of 
the lead from a single copper -ore source. While  some of the lead found in an artifact may have 
been introduced from flux or when other metals were  added to the copper ore, lead so added in 
Bronze Age  processing would usually ha ve the same isotopic  compo sition as the lead in the 
copper ore. Lead isotope studies  may thus prove useful for interpreting the archaeological  
record of the Bronze Age.  
21. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) discuss the techniques of analyzing le ad isotope composition  
(B) propose a way to determine the origin of the copper in certain artifacts  
(C) resolve a dispute concerning the analysis of copper ore  
(D) describe the deficiencies of a currently used method of chemical analysis of 
certain metals  
(E) offer an interpretation of the archaeological record of the Bronze Age  
22. The author first mentions the addition of flux during smelting (lines 18 -21) in 
order to  
(A) give a reason for the failure of elemental composition studies to determine 
ore sources  
(B) illustrate differences between various Bronze Age civilizations  
(C) show the need for using high smelting temperatures  
(D) illustrate the uniformity of lead isotope composition  
(E) explain the success of copper isotope composition analysis  
23. The author suggests which of the following about a Bronze Age artifact 
containing high concentrations of cobalt or zinc?  
(A) It could not be reliably tested for its elemental composition.  
(B) It could not be reliably tested for its copper isotope compos ition.  
(C) It could not be reliably tested for its lead isotope composition.  
(D) It could have been manufactured from ore from any one of a variety of 
sources.  
(E) It could have been produced by the addition of other metals during the 
processing of the copper ore.  
24. According to the passage, possible sources of the lead found in a copper or 
bronze artifact include which of the following?  
I. The copper ore u sed to manufacture the artifact  
II. Flux added during processing of the copper ore  
III. Other metal added during processing of the copper ore  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only   GRE  451 
 (D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
25. The author rejects copper as the  ideal choice mentioned in line 33 because  
(A) the concentration of copper in Bronze Age artifacts varies  
(B) elements other than copper may be introduced during smelting  
(C) the isotopic composition of copper changes during smelting  
(D) among common cop per ores, differences in copper isotope composition are 
too small  
(E) within a single source of copper ore, copper isotope composition can vary 
substantially  
26. The author makes which of the following statements about lead isotope 
composition?  
(A) It often varies from one copper -ore source to another.  
(B) It sometim es varies over short distances in a single copper -ore source.  
(C) It can vary during the testing of artifacts, producing a measurement error.  
(D) It frequently changes during smelting and roasting.  
(E) It may change when artifacts are buried for thousan ds of years.  
27. It can be inferred from the passage that the use of flux in processing copper ore 
can alter the lead isotope composition of the resulting metal EXCEPT when  
(A) there is a smaller concentration of lead in the flux than in the copper ore  
(B) the concentration of lead in the flux is equivalent to that of the lead in the ore  
(C) some of the lead in the flux evaporates during processing  
(D) any lead in the flux has the same isotopic composition as the lead in the ore  
(E) other metals are added during processing  
SECTION B 
Since the Hawaiian Islands have never been connected to other land masses, the great 
variety of plants in Hawaii must be a result of the long -distance dispersal of seeds, a process 
that requires bo th a method of transport and an equivalence between the ecology of the source 
area and that of the recipient area.  
There is some dispute about the method of transport involved. Some biologists argue that 
ocean and air currents are responsible for the trans port of plant seeds to Hawaii. Yet the results 
of flotation experiments and the low temperatures of air currents cast doubt on these 
hypotheses. More probable is bird transport, either externally, by accidental attachment of the 
seeds to feathers, or inter nally, by the swallowing of fruit and subsequent excretion of the 
seeds. While it is likely that fewer varieties of plant seeds have reached Hawaii externally than 
internally, more varieties are known to be adapted to external than to internal transport.  
17. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  452 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) discussing different approaches biologists have taken to testing theories about 
the distribution of plants in Hawaii  
(B) discussing different theories about the transport of plant seeds to Hawaii  
(C) discussing the extent to which air currents are responsible for the dispersal of 
plant seeds to Hawaii  
(D) resolving a dispute about the adaptability of plant seeds to bird transport  
(E) resolving a dispute about the ability of birds to carry plant  seeds long 
distances  
18. The author mentions the results of flotation experiments on plant seeds (lines 
10-12) most probably in order to  
(A) support the claim that the distribution of plants in Hawaii is the result of the 
long-distance dispersal of seeds  
(B) lend credibility to the thesis that air currents provide a method of transport for 
plant seeds to Hawaii  
(C) suggest that the long -distance dispersal of seeds is a process that requires long 
periods of time  
(D) challenge the claim that ocean currents a re responsible for the transport of 
plant seeds to Hawaii  
(E) refute the claim that Hawaiian flora evolved independently from flora in other 
parts of the world  
19. It can be inferred from information in the passage that the existence in alpine 
regions o f Hawaii of a plant species that also grows in the southwestern United 
States would justify which of the following conclusions?  
(A) The ecology of the southwestern United States is similar in important respects 
to the ecology of alpine regions of Hawaii.  
(B) There are ocean currents that flow from the southwestern United States to 
Hawaii.  
(C) The plant species discovered in Hawaii must have traveled from the 
southwestern United States only very recently.  
(D) The plant species discovered in Hawaii reached th ere by attaching to the 
feathers of birds migrating from the southwestern United States.  
(E) The plant species discovered in Hawaii is especially well adapted to transport 
over long distances.  
20. The passage supplies information for answering which of the following 
questions?  
(A) Why does successful long -distance dispersal of plant seeds require an 
equivalence between the ecology of the source area and that of the recipient 
area?  
(B) Why are more varieties of plant seeds adapted to external rather than to 
internal bird transport?   GRE  453 
 (C) What varieties of plant seeds are birds that fly long distances most likely to 
swallow?  
(D) What is a reason for accepting the long -distance dispersal of plant seeds as an 
explanation for the origin of Hawaiian flora?  
(E) What evidence do biologists cite to argue that ocean and air currents are 
responsible for the transport of plant seeds to Hawaii?  
A long -held view of the history of the English colonies that became the United States has 
been that Englands policy t oward these colonies before 1763 was dictated by commercial 
interests and that a change to a more imperial policy, dominated by expansionist militarist 
objectives, generated the tensions that ultimately led to the American Revolution. In a recent 
study, St ephen Saunders Webb has presented a formidable challenge to this view. According to 
Webb, England already had a military imperial policy for more than a century before the 
American Revolution. He sees Charles II, the English monarch between 1660 and 1685, as the 
proper successor of the Tudor monarchs of the sixteenth century and of Oliver Cromwell, all of 
whom were bent on extending centralized executive power over Englands possessions through 
the use of what Webb calls garrison government. Garrison gove rnment allowed the colonists a 
legislative assembly, but real authority, in Webbs view, belonged to the colonial governor, who 
was appointed by the king and supported by the garrison, that is, by the local contingent of 
English troops under the colonial  governors command.  
According to Webb, the purpose of garrison government was to provide military support for 
a royal policy designed to limit the power of the upper classes in the American colonies. Webb 
argues that the colonial legislative assemblies re presented the interests not of the common 
people but of the colonial upper classes, a coalition of merchants and nobility who favored 
self-rule and sought to elevate legislative authority at the expense of the executive. It was, 
according to Webb, the colo nial governors who favored the small farmer, opposed the 
plantation system, and tried through taxation to break up large holdings of land. Backed by the 
military presence of the garrison, these governors tried to prevent the gentry and merchants, 
allied in  the colonial assemblies, from transforming colonial America into a capitalistic oligarchy.  
Webbs study illuminates the political alignments that existed in the colonies in the century 
prior to the American Revolution, but his view of the crowns use of t he military as an 
instrument of colonial policy is not entirely convincing. England during the seventeenth century 
was not noted for its military achievements. Cromwell did mount Englands most ambitious 
overseas military expedition in more than a century,  but it proved to be an utter failure. Under 
Charles II, the English army was too small to be a major instrument of government. Not until 
the war with France in 1697 did William III persuade Parliament to create a professional 
standing army, and Parliament s price for doing so was to keep the army under tight legislative 
control. While it may be true that the crown attempted to curtail the power of the colonial upper 
classes, it is hard to imagine how the English army during the seventeenth century could hav e 
provided significant military support for such a policy.  
21. The passage can best be described as a  
(A) survey of the inadequacies of a conventional viewpoint  
(B) reconciliation of opposing points of view  454 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) summary and evaluation of a recent study  
(D) defense of a new thesis from anticipated objections  
(E) review of the subtle distinctions between apparently similar views  
22. The passage suggests that the view referred to in lines 1 -7 argued that  
(A) the colonial governors were sympathetic to the dem ands of the common 
people  
(B) Charles II was a pivotal figure in the shift of English monarchs toward a more 
imperial policy in their governorship of the American colonies  
(C) the American Revolution was generated largely out of a conflict between the 
colonial upper classes and an alliance of merchants and small farmers  
(D) the military did not play a major role as an instrument of colonial policy until 
1763  
(E) the colonial legislative assemblies in the colonies had little influence over the 
colonial governors  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that Webb would be most likely to agree with 
which of the following statements regarding garrison governmen t? 
(A) Garrison government gave legislative assemblies in the colonies relatively 
little authority, compared to the authority that it gave the colonial governors.  
(B) Garrison government proved relatively ineffective until it was used by 
Charles II to curb  the power of colonial legislatures.  
(C) Garrison government became a less viable colonial policy as the English 
Parliament began to exert tighter legislative control over the English 
military.  
(D) Oliver Cromwell was the first English ruler to make use of  garrison 
government on a large scale.  
(E) The creation of a professional standing army in England in 1697 actually 
weakened garrison government by diverting troops from the garrisons 
stationed in the American colonies.  
24. According to the passage, Web b views Charles II as the proper successor (line 
13) of the Tudor monarchs and Cromwell because Charles II  
(A) used colonial tax revenues to fund overseas military expeditions  
(B) used the military to extend executive power over the English colonies  
(C) wished to transform the American colonies into capitalistic oligarchies  
(D) resisted the English Parliaments efforts to exert control over the military  
(E) allowed the American colonists to use legislative assemblies as a forum for 
resolving grievances against the crown  
25. Which of the following, if true, would most seriously weaken the authors 
assertion in lines 54 -58? 
(A) Because they were poorly administered, Cromwells overseas military  GRE  455 
 expeditions were doomed to failure.  
(B) Because it relied primarily on the symbolic presence of the military, garrison 
government could be effectively administered with a relatively small number 
of troops.  
(C) Unt il early in the seventeenth century, no professional standing army in 
Europe had performed effectively in overseas military expeditions.  
(D) Many of the colonial governors appointed by the crown were also 
commissioned army officers.  
(E) Many of the English troops stationed in the American colonies were veterans 
of other overseas military expeditions.  
26. According to Webbs view of colonial history, which of the following was (were) 
true of the merchants and nobility mentioned in line 30?  
I. They were opposed to policies formulated by Charles II that would have 
transformed the colonies into capitalistic oligarchies.  
II. They were opposed to attempts by the English crown to limit the power of 
the legislative assemblies.  
III. They we re united with small farmers in their opposition to the stationing of 
English troops in the colonies.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
27. The author suggests that if William III had wanted to make use of the standing 
army mentioned in line 52 to administer garrison government in the American 
colonies, he would have had to.  
(A) make peace with France  
(B) abolish the  colonial legislative assemblies  
(C) seek approval from the English Parliament  
(D) appoint colonial governors who were more sympathetic to royal policy  
(E) raise additional revenues by increasing taxation of large landholdings in the 
colonies  
No. 9 -2 
SECTION A  
A serious critic has to comprehend the particular content, unique structure, and special 
meaning of a work of art. And here she faces a dilemma.  The critic must recognize the artistic 
element of uniqueness that requires subjective reaction; yet she  must not be unduly prejudiced 456 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 by such reactions. Her likes and dislikes are less important than what the work itself 
communicates, and her preferences may blind her to certain qualities of the work and thereby 
prevent an adequate understanding of it. Henc e, it is necessary that a critic develop a sensibility 
informed by familiarity with the history of art and aesthetic theory. On the other hand, it is 
insufficient to treat the artwork solely historically, in relation to a fixed set of ideas or values. 
The critics knowledge and training are, rather, a preparation of the cognitive and emotional 
abilities needed for an adequate personal response to an artworks own particular qualities.  
17. According to the author, a serious art critic may avoid being prejudi ced by her 
subjective reactions if she  
(A) treats an artwork in relation to a fixed set of ideas and values  
(B) brings to her observation a knowledge of art history and aesthetic theory  
(C) allows more time for the observation of each artwork  
(D) takes int o account the preferences of other art critics  
(E) limits herself to that art with which she has adequate familiarity  
18. The author implies that it is insufficient to treat  a work of art solely historically 
because  
(A) doing so would lead the critic into a dilemma  
(B) doing so can blind the critic  to some of the artwork s unique qualities  
(C) doing so can insulate the critic from personally  held beliefs  
(D) subjective reactions can produce a biased response  
(E) critics are not sufficiently familiar with art history  
19. The passage suggests that the author would be most likely to agree with which of 
the following  statements?  
(A) Art speaks to the passions as well as to the intellect.  
(B) Most works of art express unconscious wishes  or desires.  
(C) The best art is accessible to the greatest number of people.  
(D) The art produced in the last few decades is of inferior quality.  
(E) The meaning of art is a function of the social conditions in which it was 
produced.  
20. The author s argument is developed primarily by  the use of  
(A) an attack on sentimentality  
(B) an example of successful art criticism  
(C) a critique of artists training  
(D) a warning against extremes in art criticism  
(E) an analogy between art criticism and art production  
Viruses, infectious particles consisting of nucleic acid packaged in a protein coat (the 
capsid), are difficult to resist. Unable to reprodu ce outside a living cell, viruses reproduce only 
by subverting the genetic mechanisms of a host cell. In one kind of viral life cycle , the virus first  GRE  457 
 binds to the cell s surface, then penetrates the cell and sheds its capsid. The exposed viral 
nucleic acid produces new viruses from the contents of the cell. Finally, the cell releases the 
viral progeny, and a new cell cycle of infection begins. The human body responds to a viral 
infection by producing antibodies: complex, highly spe cific proteins that selectively bind to 
foreign molecules such as viruses. An antibody can either inte rfere with a virus s ability to bind 
to a cell, or can  prevent  it from releasing its nucleic acid.  
Unfortunately, the common cold , produced most often by rhinoviruses, is intractable to 
antiviral defense. Humans have difficulty resisting colds because rhinoviruses are so diverse, 
including at least 100 strains. The strains differ most in the molecular structure of the proteins 
in their capsids. Since disease -fighting antibodies bind to the capsid, an antibody developed to 
protect against one rhinovirus strain is useless against other strains. Different antibodies must 
be produced for each strain.  
A defense against rhinoviruses mig ht nonetheless succeed by exploiting hidden similarities 
among the rhinovirus strains. For example, most rhinovirus strains bind to the same kind of 
molecule (delta -receptors) on a cells surface when they attack human cells. Colonno, taking 
advantage of t hese common receptors, devised a strategy for blocking the attachment of 
rhinoviruses to their appropriate receptors. Rather than fruitlessly searching for an antibody 
that would bind to all rhinoviruses, Colonno realized that an antibody binding to the co mmon 
receptors of a human cell would prevent rhinoviruses from initiating an infection. Because 
human cells normally do not develop antibodies to components of their own cells, Colonno 
injected human cells into mice, which did produce an antibody to the co mmon receptor. In 
isolated human cells, this antibody proved to be extraordinarily effective at thwarting the 
rhinovirus. Moreover, when the antibody was given to chimpanzees, it inhibited rhinoviral 
growth, and in humans it lessened both the severity and duration of cold symptoms.  
Another possible defense against rhinoviruses was proposed by Rossman, who described 
rhinoviruses detailed molecular structure. Rossman showed that protein sequences common to 
all rhinovirus strains lie at the base of a deep ca nyon scoring  each face of the capsid. The 
narrow opening of this canyon possibly prevents the relatively large antibody molecules from 
binding to the common sequence, but smaller molecules might reach it. Among these smaller, 
nonantibody molecules, some might bind to the common sequence, lock the nucleic acid in its 
coat, and thereby prevent the virus from reproducing.  
21. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) discuss viral mechanisms and p ossible ways of circumventing certain kinds 
of those mechanisms  
(B) challenge recent research on how rhinoviruses bind to receptors on the 
surfaces of cells  
(C) suggest future research on rhinoviral growth in chimpanzees  
(D) defend a controversial research  program whose purpose is to discover the 
molecular structure of rhinovirus capsids  
(E) evaluate a dispute between advocates of two theories about the rhinovirus life 
cycle  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that the protein sequences of the capsid that 458 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 vary most among  strains of rhinovirus are those  
(A) at the base of the canyo n 
(B) outside of the canyon  
(C) responsible for producing nucleic acid  
(D) responsible for preventing the formation of delta -receptors  
(E) preventing the capsid from releasing its nucleic acid  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that a cell lacki ng delta -receptors will be  
(A) unable to prevent the rhinoviral nucleic acid from shedding its capsid  
(B) defenseless against most strains of rhinovirus  
(C) unable to release the viral progeny it develops  after infection  
(D) protected from new infections b y antibodies to the rhinovirus  
(E) resistant to infection by most strains of rhinovirus  
24. Which of the following research strategies for developing a defense against the 
common cold would the author be likely to find most promising?  
(A) Continuing to look for a general antirhinovi ral antibody  
(B) Searching for common cell -surface receptors in humans and mice  
(C) Continuing to look for similarities among the various strains of rhinovirus  
(D) Discovering how the human body produces antibodies in response to a 
rhinoviral infection  
(E) Determining the detailed molecular structure  of the nucleic acid of a 
rhinovirus  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the purpose  of Colonno s experiments 
was to determine whether  
(A) chimpanzees and humans can both be infected  by rhinoviruses  
(B) chimpanzees can produce antibodies to human cell -surface receptors  
(C) a rhinovirus  nucleic acid might be locked in  its protein coat  
(D) binding antibodies to common receptors could produce a possible defense 
against rhinoviruses  
(E) rhinoviruses are vulnerable to human antibodies  
26. According to the passage, Rossman s research suggests that  
(A) a defense against rhinoviruses might exploit structural similarities among the 
strains of rhinovirus  
(B) human cells normally do not develop antibodies to components of their own 
cells 
(C) the various strains of rhinovirus differ in their ability to bind to the surface of 
a host cell  
(D) rhinovirus versatility can work to the benefit  of researchers trying to find a 
useful antibody   GRE  459 
 (E) Colonno s research findings are probably invalid  
27. According to the passage, in order for a given antibody to bind to a given 
rhinoviral capsid, which of the following must be true?  
(A) The capsid must have a deep canyon  on each of its faces.  
(B) The antibody must be specific to the molecular structure of the particular 
capsid.  
(C) The capsid must separate from its nucleic acid before binding to an antibody.  
(D) The antibody must bind to a particular cell -surface receptor before it can bind 
to a rhino virus.  
(E) The antibody must first enter a cell containing  the particular rhinovirus.  
SECTION B 
Diamonds, an occasional component of rare igneous rocks called lamproites and 
kimberlites, have never been dated satisfactorily. However, some diamonds conta in minute 
inclusions of silicate minerals, commonly olivine, pyroxene, and garnet. These minerals can be 
dated by  radioactive decay techniques because of the very small quantities of radioactive trace 
elements they, in turn,  contain. Usually, it is possibl e to conclude that the inclusions are older 
than their diamond hosts, but with little indication of the time interval involved. Sometimes, 
however, the crystal form of the silicate inclusions is observed to resemble more closely the 
internal structure of d iamond than that of other silicate minerals. It is not known how rare this 
resemblance is, or whether it is most often seen in inclusions of silicates such as garnet,  whose 
crystallography is generally somewhat similar to that of diamond; but when present,  the 
resemblance is regarded as compelling evidence that the diamonds and inclusions are truly 
cogenetic.  
17. The author implies that silicate inclusions were most often formed  
(A) with small diamonds inside of them  
(B) with trace elements derived from the ir host minerals  
(C) by the radioactive decay of rare igneous rocks  
(D) at an earlier period than were their host minerals  
(E) from the crystallization of rare igneous material  
18. According to the passage, the age of silicate minerals included in diamo nds can 
be determined due to a feature of the  
(A) trace elements in the diamond hosts  
(B) trace elements in the rock surrounding the diamonds  
(C) trace elements in the silicate minerals  
(D) silicate minerals  crystal structure  
(E) host diamonds  crystal  structure  
19. The author states that which of the following generally has a crystal structure 
similar to that of diamond?  460 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) Lamproite  
(B) Kimberlite  
(C) Olivine  
(D) Pyroxene  
(E) Garnet  
20. The main purpose of the passage is to  
(A) explain why it has not been possible to determine the age of diamonds  
(B) explain how it might be possible to date some diamonds  
(C) compare two alternative approaches to  determining the age of diamonds  
(D) compare a method of dating diamonds with a method used to date certa in 
silicate minerals  
(E) compare the age of diamonds with that of certain silicate minerals contained 
within them  
Discussion of the assimilation of Puerto Ricans in the United States has focused on two 
factors: social standing  and the loss of nation al culture. In general, excessive stress is placed on 
one factor or the other, depending on whether the commentator is North American or Puerto 
Rican. Many North American social scientists, such as Oscar Handlin, Joseph Fitzpatrick, and 
Oscar Lewis, consid er Puerto Ricans as the most recent in a long line of ethnic entrants to 
occupy the lowest rung on the social ladder. Such a sociodemographic  approach tends to 
regard assimilation as a benign process, taking for granted increased economic advantage and 
inevitable cultural integration,  in a supposedly egalitarian context. However, this approach fails 
to take into account the colonial nature of the Puerto Rican case, with this group, unlike their 
European predecessors, coming from a nation politically subor dinated to the United States. 
Even the radical  critiques of this mainstream research model, such as the critique developed 
in Divided Society , attach the issue of ethnic assimilation too mechanically to factors of 
economic and social mobility and are thu s unable to illuminate the cultural subordination of 
Puerto Ricans as a colonial minority.  
In contrast, the colonialist  approach of island -based writers such as Eduardo 
Seda-Bonilla, Manuel Maldonado -Denis, and Luis Nieves -Falcon tends to view assimilati on as 
the forced loss of national culture in an unequal c ontest with imposed foreign values. There is, 
of course, a strong tradition of cultural accommodation among other Puerto Rican thinkers. The 
writings of Eugenio Fernandez Mendez clearly exemplify  this tradition, and many supporters of 
Puerto Rico s commonwealth status share the same universalizing orientation. But the Puerto 
Rican intellectuals who have written most about the assimilation process in the United States all 
advance cultural nationalist v iews, advocating the preservation of minority cultural distinctions 
and rejecting what they see as the subjugation of colonial nationalities.  
This cultural and political emphasis is appropriate, but the colonialist thinkers misdirect it, 
overlooking the cl ass relations at work in both Puerto Rican and North American history. They 
pose the clash of national cultures as an absolute polarity, with each culture understood as 
static and undifferentiated. Yet both the Puerto Rican and North American traditions ha ve been 
subject to constant challenge from cultural forces within their own societies, forces that may  GRE  461 
 move toward each other in ways that cannot be written off as mere assimilation.  Consider, for 
example, the indigenous and Afro -Caribbean traditions in Puerto Rican culture and how they 
influence and are influenced by other Caribbean cultures and Black cultures in the United States. 
The elements of coercion and inequality, so central to cultural contact according to the 
colonialist framework play no role in this kind of convergence of racially and ethnically different 
elements of the same social class.  
21. The author s main purpose is to  
(A) criticize the emphasis on social standing in discussions of the assimilation of 
Puerto Ricans in the United States  
(B) support the thesis that assimilation has not been a benign process for Puerto 
Ricans  
(C) defend a view of the assimilation of Puerto Ricans that emphasizes the 
preservation of national culture  
(D) indicate deficiencies in two schools of thought  on the a ssimilation of Puerto 
Ricans in the United States  
(E) reject the attempt to formulate a general framework for discussion of the 
assimilation of Puerto Ricans in the United States  
22. According to the passage, cultural accommodation  is promoted by  
(A) Eduardo Seda -Bonilla  
(B) Manuel Maldonado -Denis  
(C) the author of Divided Society  
(D) the majority of social scientists writing on immigration  
(E) many supporters of Puerto Rico s commonwealth status  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that a writer  such as Eugenio Fernandez 
Mendez would most likely  agree with which of the following statements 
concerning members of minority ethnic groups?  
(A) It is necessary for the members of such groups  to adapt to the culture of the 
majority.  
(B) The members of such groups generally encounter  a culture that is sta tic and 
undifferentiated.  
(C) Social mobility is the most important feature of the experience of members of 
such groups.  
(D) Social scientists should emphasize the cultural  and political aspects of the 
experience of members of such groups.  
(E) The assimilation of members of such groups requires the forced abandonment 
of their authentic national roots.  
24. The author implies that the Puerto Rican writers who have written most about 
assimilation do NOT do which of the following?  
(A) Regard  assimilation as benign.  462 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) Resist cultural integration.  
(C) Describe in detail the process of assimilation.  
(D) Take into account the colonial nature of the Puerto Rican case.  
(E) Criticize supporters of Puerto Rico s commonwealth status.  
25. It can b e inferred from the passage that the colonialist  approach is so called 
because its practitioners  
(A) support Puerto Rico s commonwealth status  
(B) have a strong tradition of cultural accommodation  
(C) emphasize the class relations at work in both Puerto Rican and North 
American history  
(D) pose the clash of national cultures as an absolute polarity in which each 
culture is understood as static and undifferentiated  
(E) regard the political relation of Puerto Rico to the United States as a significant 
factor in the experience of Puerto Ricans  
26. The author regards the emphasis by island -based writers on the cultural and 
political dimensions of assimilation as  
(A) ironic  
(B) dangerous  
(C) fitting but misdirected  
(D) illuminating but easily misunderstood  
(E) peculiar but benign  
27. The example discussed in lines 51 -54 is intended by the author to illustrate a  
(A) strength of the sociodemographic approach  
(B) strength of the colonialist  approach  
(C) weakness of the sociodemographic approach  
(D) weakness of the colonialist  approach  
(E) weakness of the cultural -accommodationist approach  
No. 9 -3 
SECTION A  
Classical physics defines the vacuum as a state of absen ce: a vacuum is said to exist in a 
region of space if there is nothing in it. In the quantum field theories that describe the physics 
of elementary particles, the vacuum becomes somewhat more complicated. Even in empty 
space, particles can appear spontaneo usly as a result of fluctuations of the vacuum. For 
example, an electron and a positron, or antielectron, can be created out of the void. Particles 
created in this way have only a fleeting existence; they are annihilated almost as soon as they 
appear, and their presence can never be detected directly. They are called virtual particles in  GRE  463 
 order to distinguish them from real particles, whose lifetimes are not constrained in the same 
way, and which can be detected. Thus it is still possible to define that vacu um as a space that 
has no real particles in it.  
One might expect that the vacuum would always be the state of lowest possible energy for 
a given region of space. If an area is initially empty and a real particle is put into it, the total 
energy, it seems, should be raised by at least the energy equivalent of the mass of the added 
particle. A surprising result of some recent theoretical investigations is that this assumption is 
not invariably true. There are conditions under which the introduction of a real particle of finite 
mass into an empty region of space can reduce the total energy. If the reduction in energy is 
great enough, an electron and a positron will be spontaneously created. Under these conditions 
the electron and positron are not a result of va cuum fluctuations but are real particles, which 
exist indefinitely and can be detected. In other words, under these conditions the vacuum is an 
unstable state and can decay into a state of lower energy; i.e., one in which real particles are 
created.  
The es sential condition for the decay of the vacuum is the presence of an intense electric 
field. As a result of the decay of the vacuum, the space permeated by such a field can be said to 
acquire an electric charge, and it can be called a charged vacuum. The pa rticles that materialize 
in the space make the charge manifest. An electric field of sufficient intensity to create a 
charged vacuum is likely to be found in only one place: in the immediate vicinity of a 
superheavy atomic nucleus, one with about twice as many protons as the heaviest natural 
nuclei known. A nucleus that large cannot be stable, but it might be possible to assemble one 
next to a vacuum for long enough to observe the decay of the vacuum. Experiments attempting 
to achieve this are now under way . 
17. Which of the following titles best describes the passage as a whole?  
(A) The Vacuum: Its Fluctuations and Decay  
(B) The Vacuum: Its Creation and Instability  
(C) The Vacuum: A State of Absence  
(D) Particles That Materialize i n the Vacuum  
(E) Classical Physics and the Vacuum  
18. According to the passage, the assumption that the introduction of a real particle 
into a vacuum raises the total energy of that region of space has been cast into 
doubt by which of the following?  
(A) Finding s from laboratory experiments  
(B) Findings from observational field experiments  
(C) Accidental observations made during other experiments  
(D) Discovery of several erroneous propositions in accepted theories  
(E) Predictions based on theoretical w ork 
19. It can be inferred from the passage that scientists are currently making efforts to 
observe which of the following events?  
(A) The decay of a vacuum in the presence of virtual particles  464 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) The decay of a vacuum next to a superheavy atomic nucleus  
(C) The creation of a superheavy atomic nucleus next to an intense electric field  
(D) The creation of a virtual electron and a virtual positron as a result of 
fluctuations of a vacuum  
(E) The creation of a charged vacuum in which only real electrons can be created 
in the vacuum s region of space  
20. Physicists  recent investigations of the decay of the vacuum, as described in the 
passage, most closely resemble which of the following  hypothetical events in 
other disciplines?  
(A) On the basis of data gathered in a carefully controlled laboratory experiment, 
a chemist predicts and then demonstrates the physical properties of a newly 
synthesized polymer.  
(B) On the basis of manipulations  of macroeconomic theory, an economist 
predicts that, contrary to accepted economic theory, inflation and 
unemployment will both decline under conditions of rapid economic growth.  
(C) On the basis of a rereading of the texts of Jane Austen s novels, a lite rary 
critic suggests that, contrary to accepted literary interpretations. Austen s 
plots were actually metaphors for political events in early nineteenth -century 
England.  
(D) On the basis of data gathered in carefully planned observations of several 
specie s of birds, a biologist proposes a modification in the accepted theory 
of interspecies competition.  
(E) On the basis of a study of observations incidentally recorded in 
ethnographers  descriptions of non -Western societies, an anthropologist 
proposes a new theory of kinship relations.  
21. According to the passage, the author considers the reduction of  energy in an 
empty region of space to which a real particle has been added to be  
(A) a well -known process  
(B) a frequent occurrence  
(C) a fleeting aberration  
(D) an unimportant event  
(E) an unexpected outcome  
22. According to the passage, virtual parti cles differ from real particles in which of 
the following ways?  
I. Virtual particles have extremely short lifetimes.  
II. Virtual particles are created in an intense electric field.  
III. Virtual particles cannot be detected directly.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only   GRE  465 
 (C) III only  
(D) I and II only  
(E) I and III only  
23. The author s assertions concerning the conditions that lead to the decay of the 
vacuum would be most weakened if which of the following occurred?  
(A) Scientists created an electric field next to a vacuum, but found that the 
elect ric field was not intense enough to create a charged vacuum.  
(B) Scientists assembled a superheavy atomic nucleus next to a vacuum, but 
found that no virtual particles were created in the vacuum s region of space.  
(C) Scientists assembled a superheavy atom ic nucleus next to a vacuum, but 
found that they could not then detect any real particles in the vacuum s 
region of space.  
(D) Scientists introduced a virtual electron and a virtual positron into a vacuum s 
region of space, but found that the vacuum did no t then fluctuate.  
(E) Scientists introduced a real electron and a real positron into a vacuum s region 
of space, but found that the total energy of the space increased by the energy 
equivalent of the mass of the particles.  
Simone de Beauvoir s work grea tly influenced Betty Friedan sIndeed, made it possible. 
Why, then, was it Friedan who became the prophet of women s emancipation in the United 
States? Political conditions, as well as a certain anti -intellectual bias, prepared American s and 
the Ameri can media to better receive Friedan s deradicalized and highly pragmatic The 
Feminine  Mystique , published in 1963, than Beauvoir s theoretical reading of women s situation 
in The Second Sex.  In 1953 when The Second Sex  first appeared in translation in the Unite d 
States, the country had entered the silent, fearful fortress of the anticommunist McCarthy years 
(1950 -1954), and Beauvoir was suspected of Marxist sympathies. Even The Nation , a generally 
liberal magazine, warned its readers against certain political l eanings  of the author. Open 
acknowledgement of the existence of women s oppression was too radical for the United States 
in the fifties, and Beauvoir s conclusion, that change in women s economic condition, though 
insufficient by itself, remains the basi c factor  in improving women s situation, was particularly 
unacceptable.  
24. According to the passage, one difference between The Feminine Mystique and 
The Second Sex  is that Friedan s book  
(A) rejects the idea that women are oppressed  
(B) provides a prima rily theoretical analysis of women s lives  
(C) does not reflect the political beliefs of its author  
(D) suggests that women s economic condition has no impact on their status  
(E) concentrates on the practical aspects of the questions of women s 
emancipation  
25. The author quotes from The Nation  most probably in order to  
(A) modify an earlier assertion  466 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) point out a possible exception to her argument  
(C) illustrate her cen tral point  
(D) clarify the meaning of a term  
(E) cite an expert opinion  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following is not a factor in 
the explanation of why The Feminine Mystique  was received more positively in 
the United States  than was The Second Sex ? 
(A) By 1963 political conditions in the United States had changed.  
(B) Friedan s book was less intellectual and abstract than Beauvoir s. 
(C) Readers did not recognize the powerful influence of Beauvoir s book on 
Friedan s ideas.  
(D) Friedan s approach to the issue of women s emancipation was less radical 
than Beauvoir s. 
(E) American readers were more willing to consider the problem of the 
oppression of women in the sixties than they had been in the fifties.  
27. According to the passage, Beauvoir s book asserted that the status of women  
(A) is the outcome of political oppression  
(B) is inherently tied to their economic condition  
(C) can be best improved under a communist government  
(D) is a theoretical, rather than a pragmatic, issue  
(E) is a critical area of discussion in Marxist economic theory  
SECTION B 
One of the  questions of interest in the study of the evolution of spiders is whether the 
weaving of orb webs evolved only once or several times. About half the 35,000 known kinds of 
spiders make webs; a third of the web weavers make orb webs. Since most orb weavers belong 
either to the Araneidae or the Uloboridae families, the origin of the orb web can be determined 
only by ascertaining whether the families are related.  
Recent taxonomic analysis of individuals from both families indicates that the families 
evolved fr om different ancestors, thereby contradicting Wiehle s theory. This theory post ulates  
that the families must be related, based on the assumption that complex behavior, such as web 
building, could evolve only once. According to Kullman, web structure is the  only charact eristic 
that suggests a relationship between families. The families differ in appearance, structure of 
body hair, and arrangement of eyes. Only Uloborids lack venom glands. Further identification 
and study of characteristic features will undou btedly answer the question of the evolution of the 
orb web.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) settle the question of whether orb webs evolved once or more than once  
(B) describe scientific speculation concerning an issue related to the evolu tion of  GRE  467 
 orb webs  
(C) analyze the differences between the characteristic features of spiders in the 
Araneidae and Uloboridae families  
(D) question the methods used by earlier investigators of the habits of spiders  
(E) demonstrate that Araneidae spiders are not related to Uloboridae spiders  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that all orb -weaving spiders belong to types of 
spiders that  
(A) lack venom glands  
(B) are included either in the Uloboridae or Araneid ae families  
(C) share few characteristic features with other spider types  
(D) comprise less than a third of all known types of spiders  
(E) are more recently evolved than other types of spiders  
19. According to the passage, members of the Araneidae famil y can be distinguished 
from members of the Uloboridae family by all of the following EXCEPT:  
(A) the presence of venom glands  
(B) the type of web they spin  
(C) the structure of their body hair  
(D) the arrangement of their eyes  
(E) their appearance  
20. Which of the following statements, if true, most weakens Wiehles theory that 
complex behavior could evolve only once?  
(A) Horses, introduced to the New World by the Spaniards, thrived under diverse 
climatic conditions.  
(B) Plants of the Palmaceae family, d escendants of a common ancestor, evolved 
unique seed forms even though the plants occupy similar habitats throughout 
the world.  
(C) All mammals are descended from a small, rodentlike animal whose physical 
characteristics in some form are found in all its d escendants.  
(D) Plants in the Cactaceae and Euphorbiaceae families, although they often look 
alike and have developed similar mechanisms to meet the rigors of the desert, 
evolved independently.  
(E) The Cuban anole, which was recently introduced in the F lorida wilds, is 
quickly replacing the native Florida chameleon because the anole has no 
competitors.  
Popular art has a number of meanings, impossible to define with any precision, which 
range from folklore to junk. The poles are clear enough, but the mi ddle tends to blur. The 
Hollywood Western of the 1930s, for example, has elements of folklore, but is closer to junk 
than to high art or folk art. There can be great trash, just as there is bad high art. The musicals 
of George Gershwin are great popular a rt, never aspiring to high art. Schubert and Brahms, 468 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 however, used elements of popular music folk themes in works clearly intended as high art. 
The case of Verdi is a different one: he took a popular genre bourgeois melodrama set to 
music (an accurate defi nition of nineteenth -century opera) and, without altering its 
fundamental nature, transmuted it into high art. This remains one of the greatest achievements 
in music, and one that cannot be fully appreciated without recognizing the essential trashiness 
of the genre.  
As an example of such a transmutation, consider what Verdi made of the typical political 
elements of nineteenth -century opera. Generally in the plots of these operas, a hero or 
heroine usually portrayed only as an individual, unfettered by class is caught between the 
immoral corruption of the aristocracy and the doctrinaire rigidity or secret greed of the leaders 
of the proletariat. Verdi transforms this naive and unlikely formulation with music of 
extraordinary energy and rhythmic vitality, musi c more subtle than it seems at first hearing. 
There are scenes and arias that still sound like calls to arms and were clearly understood as 
such when they were first performed. Such pieces lend an immediacy to the otherwise veiled 
political message of thes e operas and call up  feelings beyond those of the opera itself.  
Or consider Verdis treatment of character. Before Verdi, there were rarely any characters 
at all in musical drama, only a series of situations which allowed the singers to express a series 
of emotion al states. Any attempt to find coherent psychological portrayal in these operas is 
misplaced ingenuity. The only coherence was the singers vocal technique: when the cast 
changed, new arias were almost always substituted, generally adapted from other opera s. 
Verdis characters, on the other hand, have genuine consistency and integrity, even if, in many 
cases, the consistency is that of pasteboard melodrama. The integrity of the character is 
achieved through the music: once he had become established, Verdi d id not rewrite his music 
for different singers or countenance alterations or substitutions of somebody elses arias in one 
of his operas, as every eighteenth -century composer had done. When he revised an opera, it 
was only for dramatic economy and effectiv eness.  
21. The author refers to Schubert and Brahms in order to suggest  
(A) that their achievements are no less substantial than those of Verdi  
(B) that their works are examples of great trash  
(C) the extent to which Schubert and Brahms influenced the late r compositions of 
Verdi  
(D) a contrast between the conventions of nineteenth -century opera and those of 
other musical forms  
(E) that popular music could be employed in compositions intended as high art  
22. According to the passage, the immediacy of the political message in Verdis 
operas stems from the  
(A) vitality and subtlety of the music  
(B) audiences familiarity with earlier operas  
(C) portrayal of heightened emotional states  
(D) individual talents of the singers  
(E) verisimilitude of the charact ers  GRE  469 
 23. According to the passage, all of the following characterize musical drama before 
Verdi EXCEPT:  
(A) arias tailored to a particular singers ability  
(B) adaptation of music from other operas  
(C) psychological inconsistency in the portrayal of charact ers 
(D) expression of emotional states in a series of dramatic situations  
(E) music used for the purpose of defining a character  
24. It can be inferred that the author regards Verdis revisions to his operas with  
(A) regret that the original music and texts were altered  
(B) concern that many of the revisions altered the plot s of the original work  
(C) approval for the intentions that motivated the revisions  
(D) puzzlement, since the revisions seem largely insignificant  
(E) enthusiasm, since the revisions were aimed at reducing the conventionality of 
the operas  plots  
25. According to the passage, one of Verdi s achievements within the framework of 
nineteenth -century opera and its conventions was to  
(A) limit the extent to which singers influenced the musical compositions  and 
performance of his operas  
(B) use his operas prima rily as forums to protest both the moral corruption and 
dogmatic rigidity of the political leaders of his time  
(C) portray psychologically complex characters shaped by the political 
environment surrounding them  
(D) incorporate elements of folklore into bot h the music and plots of his operas  
(E) introduce political elements into an art form that had traditionally avoided 
political content  
26. Which of the following best describes the relationship of the first paragraph of the 
passage to the passage as a w hole?  
(A) It provides a group of specific examples from which generalizations are 
drawn later in the  passage.  
(B) It leads to an assertion that is supported by examples later in the passage.  
(C) It defines terms and relationships that are challenged in an argument later in 
the passage.  
(D) It briefly compares and contrasts several achievements that are examined in 
detail later in the passage.  
(E) It explains a method of judging a work of art, a method that is used later in 
the passage.  
27. It can be inferred that the author regards the independence from social class of the 
heroes and heroines of nineteenth -century opera as  470 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) an idealized but fundamentally accurate portrayal of bourgeois life  
(B) a plot convention with no real connection to political reality  
(C) a plot refinement unique to Verdi  
(D) a symbolic representation of the position of the bourgeoisie relative to the 
aristocracy and  the proletariat  
(E) a convention largely seen as irrelevant by audiences  
No. 9 -4 
SECTION A  
(The article from which the passage was taken appeared in 1982.)  
Theorists are divided concerning the origin of the Moon. Some hypothesize that the Moon 
was formed in the same w ay as were the planets in the inner solar system (Mercury, Venus, 
Mars, and Earth) from planet -forming materials in the presolar nebula. But, unlike the cores of 
the inner planets, the Moons core contains little or no iron, while the typical planet -formin g 
materials were quite rich in iron. Other theorists propose that the Moon was ripped out of the 
Earths rocky mantle by the Earths collision with another large celestial body after much of the 
Earths iron fell to its core. One problem with the collision  hypothesis is the question of how a 
satellite formed in this way could have settled into the nearly circular orbit that the Moon has 
today. Fortunately, the collision hypothesis is testable. If it is true, the mantlerocks of the Moon 
and the Earth should be the same geochemically.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) present two hypotheses concerning the origin of the Moon  
(B) discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the collision hypothesis concerning 
the origin of the Moon  
(C) propose that hyp otheses concerning the Moons origin be tested  
(D) argue that the Moon could not have been formed out of the typical 
planet -forming materials of the presolar nebula  
(E) describe one reason why the Moons geochemical makeup should resemble 
that of the Ea rth 
18. According to the passage, Mars and the Earth are similar in which of the 
following ways?  
I. Their satellites were formed by collisions with other celestial bodies.  
II. Their cores contain iron.  
III. They were formed from the presolar nebula.  
(A) II I only  
(B) I and II only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only   GRE  471 
 (E) I, II, and III  
19. The author implies that a nearly circular orbit is unlikely for a satellite that  
(A) circles one of the inner planets  
(B) is deficient in iron  
(C) is different from its planet geochemically  
(D) was formed by a collision between t wo celestial bodies  
(E) was formed out of the planet -forming materials in the presolar nebula  
20. Which of the following, if true, would be most likely to make it difficult to verify 
the collision hypothesis in the manner suggested by the author?  
(A) The Moons core and mantlerock are almost inactive geologically.  
(B) The mantlerock of the Earth has changed in composition since the formation 
of the Moon, while the mantlerock of the Moon has remained chemically 
inert.  
(C) Much of the Earths iron fell to the Earths core long before the formation of 
the Moon, after which the Earths mantlerock remained unchanged.  
(D) Certain of the Earths elements, such as platinum, gold, and iridium, followed 
iron to the Earths core.  
(E) The mantlerock of the Moon contains elements such as platinum, gold, and 
iridium.  
Surprisingly enough, modern historians have rarely interested themselves in the history of 
the American South in the period before the South began to become self -consciously and 
distinctively Southern the decades after 1815. Consequently, the cultural history of Britains 
North American empire in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries has been written almost as 
if the Southern colonies had never existed. The Americ an culture that emerged during the 
Colonial and Revolutionary eras has been depicted as having been simply an extension of New 
England Puritan culture. However, Professor Davis has recently argued that the South stood 
apart from the rest of American societ y during this early period, following its own unique 
pattern of cultural development. The case for Southern distinctiveness rests upon two related 
premises: first, that the cultural similarities among the five Southern colonies were far more 
impressive tha n the differences, and second, that what made those colonies alike also made 
them different from the other colonies. The first, for which Davis offers an enormous amount of 
evidence, can be accepted without major reservations; the second is far more proble matic.  
What makes the second premise problematic is the use of the Puritan colonies as a basis 
for comparison. Quite properly, Davis decries the excessive influence ascribed by historians to 
the Puritans in the formation of American culture. Yet Davis inad vertently adds weight to such 
ascriptions by using the Puritans as the standard against which to assess the achievements and 
contributions of Southern colonials. Throughout, Davis focuses on the important, and 
undeniable, differences between the Southern a nd Puritan colonies in motives for and patterns 
of early settlement, in attitudes toward nature and Native Americans, and in the degree of 
receptivity to metropolitan cultural influences.  
However, recent scholarship has strongly suggested that those aspect s of early New 472 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 England culture that seem to have been most distinctly Puritan, such as the strong religious 
orientation and the communal impulse, were not even typical of New England as a whole, but 
were largely confined to the two colonies of Massachusett s and Connecticut. Thus, what in 
contrast to the Puritan colonies appears to Davis to be peculiarly Southern acquisitiveness, a 
strong interest in politics and the law, and a tendency to cultivate metropolitan cultural 
models was not only more typically En glish than the cultural patterns exhibited by Puritan 
Massachusetts and Connecticut, but also almost certainly characteristic of most other early 
modern British colonies from Barbados north to Rhode Island and New Hampshire. Within the 
larger framework of American colonial life, then, not the Southern but the Puritan colonies 
appear to have been distinctive, and even they seem to have been rapidly assimilating to the 
dominant cultural patterns by the late Colonial period.  
21. The author is primarily concern ed with  
(A) refuting a claim about the influence of Puritan culture on the early American 
South  
(B) refuting a thesis about the distinctiveness of the culture of the early American 
South  
(C) refuting the two premises that underlie Davis discussion of the culture of the 
American South in the period before 1815  
(D) challenging the hypothesis that early American culture was homogeneous in 
nature  
(E) challenging the contention that the American South made greater 
contributions to early American culture than  Puritan New England did  
22. The passage implies that the attitudes toward Native Americans that prevailed in 
the Southern colonies  
(A) were in conflict with the cosmopolitan outlook of the South  
(B) derived from Southerners strong interest in the law  
(C) were modeled after those that prevailed in the North  
(D) differed from those that prevailed in the Puritan colonies  
(E) developed as a response to attitudes that prevailed in Massachusetts and 
Connecticut  
23. According to the author, the depiction of American culture during the Colonial 
and Revolutionary eras as an extension of New England Puritan culture reflects 
the 
(A) fact that historians have overestimated the importance of the Puritans in the 
development of American culture  
(B) fact that early American culture was deeply influenced by the strong religious 
orientation of the colonists  
(C) failure to recognize im portant and undeniable cultural differences between 
New Hampshire and Rhode Island on the one hand and the Southern 
colonies on the other   GRE  473 
 (D) extent to which Massachusetts and Connecticut served as cultural models for 
the other American colonies  
(E) extent to which colonial America resisted assimilating cultural patterns that 
were typically English  
24. The author of the passage is in agreement with which of the following elements 
of Davis book?  
I. Davis claim that acquisitiveness was a chara cteristic unique to the South 
during the Colonial period  
II. Davis argument that there were significant differences between Puritan and 
Southern culture during the Colonial period  
III. Davis thesis that the Southern colonies shared a common culture  
(A) I only 
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) I and II only  
(E) II and III only  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would find Davis second 
premise (lines 18 -20) more plausible if it were true that  
(A) Puritan culture had displayed the tendency characteristic of the South to 
cultivate metro politan cultural models  
(B) Puritan culture had been dominant in all the non -Southern colonies during the 
seventeenth and eighteen centuries  
(C) the communal impulse and a strong religious orientation had been more 
prevalent in the South  
(D) the various cu ltural patterns of the Southern colonies had more closely 
resembled each other  
(E) the cultural patterns characteristic of most early modern British colonies had 
also been characteristic of the Puritan colonies  
26. The passage suggests that by the late Colonial period the tendency to cultivate 
metropolitan cultural models was a c ultural pattern that was  
(A) dying out as Puritan influence began to grow  
(B) self-consciously and distinctively Southern  
(C) spreading to Massachusetts and Connecticut  
(D) more characteristic of the Southern colonies than of England  
(E) beginning to sp read to Rhode Island and New Hampshire  
27. Which of the following statements could most logically follow the last sentence 
of the passage?  
(A) Thus, had more attention been paid to the evidence, Davis would not have 474 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 been tempted to argue that the culture o f the South diverged greatly from 
Puritan culture in the seventeenth century.  
(B) Thus, convergence, not divergence, seems to have characterized the cultural 
development of the American colonies in the eighteenth century.  
(C) Thus, without the cultural div ersity represented by the America South, the 
culture of colonial America would certainly have been homogeneous in 
nature.  
(D) Thus, the contribution of Southern colonials to American culture was 
certainly overshadowed by that of the Puritans.  
(E) Thus, the culture of America during the Colonial period was far more 
sensitive to outside influences than historians are accustomed to 
acknowledge.  
SECTION B 
For some time scientists have believed that cholesterol plays a major role in heart disease 
because peop le with familial hypercholesterolemia , a genetic defect, have six to eight times the 
normal level of cholesterol in their blood and they invariably develop heart disease. These 
people lack cell -surface receptors for low -density lipoproteins (LDLs), which are the 
fundamental carriers  of blood cholesterol to the body cells that use cholesterol. Without an 
adequate number of cell -surface receptors to remove LDLs from the blood, the 
cholesterol -carrying LDLs remain in the blood, increasing blood cholesterol levels. Scientists 
also noti ced that people with familial hypercholesterolemia appear to produce more LDLs than 
normal individuals. How, scientists wondered, could a genetic mutation that causes a slowdown 
in the removal of LDLs from the blood also result in an increase in the synt hesis of this 
cholesterol -carrying protein?  
Since scientists could not experiment on human body tissue, their knowledge of familial 
hypercholesterolemia was severely limited. However, a breakthrough came in the laboratories 
of Yoshio Watanabe of Kobe Unive rsity in Japan in 1980. Watanabe noticed that a male rabbit in 
his colony had ten times the normal concentration of cholesterol in its blood. By appropriate 
breeding, Watanabe obtained a strain of rabbits that had very high cholesterol levels. These 
rabbit s spontaneously developed heart disease. To his surprise, Watanabe further found that 
the rabbits, like humans with familial hypercholesterolemia, lacked LDL receptors. Thus, 
scientists could study these Watanabe rabbits to gain a better understanding of f amilial 
hypercholesterolemia in humans.  
Prior to the breakthrough at Kobe University, it was known that LDLs are secreted from the 
liver in the form of a precursor, called very low -density lipoproteins (VLDLs), which carry 
triglycerides  as well as relatively small amounts of cholesterol. The triglycerides are removed 
from the VLDLs by fatty and other tissues. What remains is a remnant particle that must be 
removed from the blood. What scientists learned by studying the Watanabe  rabbits is that the 
removal of the VLDL remnant requires the LDL receptor. Normally, the majority of the VLDL 
remnants go to the liver where they bind to LDL receptors and are degraded. In the Watanabe 
rabbit, due to a lack of LDL receptors on liver cells , the VLDL remnants remain in the blood and  GRE  475 
 are eventually converted to LDLs. The LDL receptors thus have a dual effect in controlling LDL 
levels. They are necessary to prevent oversynthesis of LDLs from VLDL remnants and they are 
necessary for the norma l removal of LDLs from the blood. With this knowledge, scientists are 
now well on the way toward developing drugs that dramatically lower cholesterol levels in 
people afflicted with certain forms of familial hypercholesterolemia.  
17. In the passage, the a uthor is primarily concerned with  
(A) presenting a hypothesis and describing compelling evidence in support of it  
(B) raising a question and describing an important discovery that led to an answer  
(C) showing that a certain genetically caused disease can b e treated effectively 
with drugs  
(D) explaining what causes the genetic mutation that leads to heart disease  
(E) discussing the importance of research on animals for the study of human 
disease  
18. Which of the following drugs, if developed, would most l ikely be an example of 
the kind of drug mentioned in line 53?  
(A) A drug that stimulates the production of VLDL remnants  
(B) A drug that stimulates the production of LDL receptors on the liver  
(C) A drug that stimulates the production of an enzyme needed f or cholesterol 
production  
(D) A drug that suppresses the production of body cells that use cholesterol  
(E) A drug that prevents triglycerides from attaching to VLDL s 
19. The passage supplies information to answer which of the following questions?  
(A) Which body cells are the primary users of cholesterol?  
(B) How did scientists discover that LDL s are s ecreted from the liver in the form 
of a precursor?  
(C) Where in the body are VLDL remnants degraded?  
(D) Which body tissues produce triglycerides?  
(E) What techniques are used to determine the presence or absence of cell -surface 
receptors?  
20. According  to the passage, by studying the Watanabe rabbits scientists learned that  
(A) VLDL remnants are removed from the blood by LDL receptors in the liver  
(B) LDL s are secreted from the liver in the form of precursors called VLDL s 
(C) VLDL remnant particles co ntain small amounts  of cholesterol  
(D) triglycerides are removed from VLDL s by fatty tissues  
(E) LDL receptors remove LDL s from the  blood  
21. The development of drug treatments for some forms of familial 
hypercholesterolemia is regarded by the author as  
(A) possible, but not very important  476 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) interesting, but too costly to be practical  
(C) p romising, but many years off  
(D) extremely unlikely  
(E) highly probable  
22. The passage implies that if the Watanabe rabbits  had had as many LDL receptors 
on their livers as do normal rabbits,  the Watanabe rabbits would  have been  
(A) less likely than no rmal rabbits to develop heart disease  
(B) less likely than normal rabbits to develop high concentrations of cholesterol 
in their blood  
(C) less useful than they actually were to scientists  in the study of familial 
hypercholesterolemia  in humans  
(D) unable to secrete VLDL s from their livers  
(E) immune to drugs that lower cholesterol levels in people with certain forms of  
familial hypercholesterolemia  
23. The passage implies that Watanabe rabbits differ from normal rabbits in which  of 
the following ways?  
(A) Watanabe rabbits have more LDL receptors than do normal rabbits.  
(B) The blood of Watanabe rabbits contains more VLDL remnants than does the 
blood of  normal rabbits.  
(C) Watanabe rabbits have fewer fatty tissues than do normal rabbits.  
(D) Watanabe rabbits secrete lower levels of VLDL s than do normal rabbits.  
(E) The blood of Watanabe rabbits contains fewer LDL s than does the blood of 
normal rabbits.  
(The article from which this passage was taken appeared in 1981.)  
When speaking of Romare Bearden, one is tempted to say, A great Black American artist.  
The subject matter of Bearden s collages is certainly Black. Portrayals of the folk of Mecklenburg 
County, North Carolina, whom he remembers from early childhood, of the jazz musicians and 
tenement roofs of his Harlem days, of Pittsburgh steelworkers, and his  reconstruction of 
classical Greek myths in the guise of  the ancient Black kingdom of Benin, attest to this. In 
natural harmony with this choice of subject matter are the social sensibilities of the artist, who 
remains active today with the Cinque Gallery in Manhattan, which he helped found and which  is 
devoted to showing the work of minority artists.  
Then why not call Bearden a Black American artist? Because ultimately this categorization 
is too narrow. What stands up in the end is structure,  Bearden says. What I try to do is 
amplify. If I were ju st creating a picture of a farm woman from back home, it would have 
meaning to her and people there. But art amplifies itself to something universal.  
24. According to the passage, all of the following are depicted in Bearden s collages 
EXCEPT:  
(A) workers  in Pittsburgh s steel mills   GRE  477 
 (B) scenes set in the ancient kingdom of Benin  
(C) people Bearden knew as a child  
(D) traditional representations of the classical heroes of Greek mythology  
(E) the jazz musicians of the Harlem Bearden used  to know  
25. The a uthor suggests that Bearden should not be  called a Black American artist 
because  
(A) there are many collages by Bearden in which  the subject matter is not Black  
(B) Bearden s work reflects the Black American experience in a highly individual 
style  
(C) thro ugh the structure of Bearden s art his Black subjects come to represent all 
of humankind  
(D) Bearden s true significance lies not so much in his own work as in his efforts 
to help other minority artists  
(E) much of Bearden s work uses the ancient Black kingdom of Benin for its 
setting  
26. Bearden s social sensibilities and the subject matter of his collages are mentioned 
by the author in order to explain  
(A) why one might be tempted to call Bearden a Black American artist  
(B) why Bearden cannot be readily categorized  
(C) why Bearden s appeal is thought by many to be ultimately universal  
(D) how deeply an artist s artistic creations are influenced by he artist s social 
conscience  
(E) what makes Beard en unique among contemporary Black American artists  
27. The author of the passage is chiefly concerned with  
(A) discussing Bearden s philosophy of art  
(B) assessing the significance of the ethnic element  in Bearden s work  
(C) acknowledging Bearden s succes s in giving artistic expression to the Black 
American experience  
(D) pointing out Bearden s helpfulness to other minority artists  
(E) tracing Bearden s progress toward artistic maturity  
No. 9 -5 
SECTION A  
Zooplankton, tiny animals adapted to an existence in  the ocean, have evolved clever 
mechanisms for obtaining  their food, miniscule phytoplankton (plant plankton). A very 
speciali zed feeding adaptation in zooplankton is that of the tadpolelike appendicularian who 
lives in a walnut -sized (or smaller) balloon of mucus equipped with filters that capture and 478 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 concentrate phytoplankton. The balloon, a transparent structure that varies in  design according 
to the type of appendicularian in habiting it, also protects the animal and helps to keep  it afloat. 
Water containing phytoplankton is pumped by the appendicularians muscular tail into the 
balloons incurrent filters, passes through the feeding filter  where the appendicularian sucks the 
food into its mouth,  and then goes through an exit passage. Found in all the  oceans of the 
world, including the Arctic Ocean, appendicularians tend to remain near the waters surface 
where the density of p hytoplankton is greatest.  
17. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following is true of 
appendicularians?  
(A) They are exclusively carnivorous.  
(B) They have more than one method of obtaining food.  
(C) They can tolerate frigid water.  
(D) They can disguise themselves by secreting mucus.  
(E) They are more sensitive to light than are other zooplankton.  
18. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) explaining how appendicularians obtain food  
(B) examining the flotation methods of appendicul arians  
(C) mapping the distribution of appendicularians around the world  
(D) describing how appendicularians differ from other zooplankton  
(E) comparing the various types of balloons formed by appendicularians  
19. According to the passage, all of the fo llowing are descriptive of appendicularians 
EXCEPT:  
(A) tailed  
(B) vegetarian  
(C) small -sized  
(D) single -celled  
(E) ocean -dwelling  
20. The passage suggests that appendicularians tend to remain in surface waters 
because they  
(A) prefer the warmer water n ear the surface  
(B) are unable to secrete mucus at the lower levels of the ocean  
(C) use the contrast of light and shadow at the surface to hide from predators  
(D) live in balloons that cannot withstand he water pressure deeper in the ocean  
(E) eat food  that grows more profusely near the surface  
Students of United States history, seeking to identify the circumstances that encouraged 
the emergence of feminist movements, have thoroughly investigated the 
mid-nineteenth -century American economic and social c onditions that affected the status of 
women. These historians, however, have analyzed less fully the development of specifically  GRE  479 
 feminist ideas and activities during the same period. Furthermore, the ideological origins of 
feminism in the United States hav e been obscured because, even when historians did take into 
account those feminist ideas and activities occurring within the United States, they failed to 
recognize that feminism was then a truly international movement actually centered in Europe. 
American  feminist activists who have been described as solitary and individual theorists 
were in reality  connected to a movement utopian socialism which was already popularizing 
feminist ideas in Europe during the two decades that culminated in the first womens rights 
conference held at Seneca Falls, New York, in 1848. Thus, a complete understand ing of the 
origins and development of nineteenth -century feminism in the United States requires that the 
geographical focus be widened to include Europe and that the detailed study already made of 
social conditions be expanded to include the ideological de velopment of feminism.  
The earliest and most popular of the utopian socialists were the Saint -Simonians. The 
specifically feminist part of Saint -Simonianism has, however, been less studied than the groups 
contribution to early socialism. This is regrettab le on two counts. By 1832 feminism was the 
central concern of Saint -Simonianism and entirely absorbed its adherents energy; hence, by 
ignoring its feminism, European historians have misunderstood Saint -Simonianism. Moreover, 
since many feminist ideas can be traced to Saint -Simonianism, European historians 
appreciation of later feminism in France and the United States remained limited.  
Saint-Simons followers, many of whom were women, based their feminism on an 
interpretation o f his project to reorganize the globe by replacing brute force with the rule of 
spiritual powers. The new world order would be ruled together by a male, to represent 
reflection, and a female, to represent sentiment. This complementarity reflects the fact t hat, 
while the Saint -Simonians did not reject the belief that there were innate differences between 
men and women, they nevertheless foresaw an equally important social and political role for 
both sexes in their utopia.  
Only a few Saint -Simonians opposed a  definition of sexual equality based on gender 
distinction. This minority believed that individuals of both sexes were born similar in capacity 
and character, and they ascribed male -female differences to socialization and education. The 
envisioned result o f both currents of thought, however, was that women would enter public life 
in the new age and that sexual equality would reward men as well as women with an improved 
way of life.  
21. It can be inferred that the author considers those historians who descri be early 
feminists in the United States as solitary to be  
(A) insufficiently familiar with the international origins of nineteenth -century 
American feminist thought  
(B) overly concerned with the regional diversity of feminist ideas in the period 
before 1 848 
(C) not focused narrowly enough in their geographical scope  
(D) insufficiently aware of the ideological consequences of the Seneca Falls 
conference  
(E) insufficiently concerned with the social conditions out of which feminism 
developed  480 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 22. According to the passage, which of the following is true of the Seneca Falls 
conference on womens rights?  
(A) It was primarily a product of nineteenth -century Saint -Simonian feminist 
thought.  
(B) It was the work of American activists who were independent of feminists 
abroad.  
(C) It was the culminating achievement of the utopian socialist movement.  
(D) It was a manifestation of an international movement for socia l change and 
feminism.  
(E) It was the final manifestation of the womens rights movement in the United 
States in the nineteenth century.  
23. The authors attitude toward most European historians who have studied the 
Saint -Simonians is primarily one of  
(A) approval of the specific focus of their research  
(B) disapproval of their lack of attention to the issue that absorbed most of the 
Saint -Simonians energy after 1832  
(C) approval of their general focus on social conditions  
(D) disapproval of their lack  of attention to links between the Saint -Simonians 
and their American counterparts  
(E) disagreement with their interpretation of the Saint -Simonian belief in sexual 
equality  
24. The author mentions all of the following as characteristic of the Saint -Simonians 
EXCEPT:  
(A) The group included many women among its members.  
(B) The group believed in a world that would be characterized by sexual equality.  
(C) The group was among the earliest European socialist groups.  
(D) Most members believed that women should enter public life.  
(E) Most members believed that women and men were inherent ly similar in 
ability and character.  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the Saint -Simonians envisioned a utopian 
society having which of the following characteristics?  
(A) It would be worldwide.  
(B) It would emphasize dogmatic religious principle s. 
(C) It would most influence the United States.  
(D) It would have armies composed of women rather than of men.  
(E) It would continue to develop new feminist ideas.  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that the author believes that study of 
Saint -Simonianism i s necessary for historians of American feminism because  GRE  481 
 such study  
(A) would clarify the ideological origins of those feminist ideas that influenced 
American feminism  
(B) would increase understanding of a movement that deeply influenced the 
utopian socialism of early American feminists  
(C) would focus attention on the most important aspect of Saint -Simoni an 
thought before 1832  
(D) promises to offer insight into a movement that was a direct outgrowth of the 
Seneca Falls conference of 1848  
(E) could increase understanding of those ideals that absorbed most of the energy 
of the earliest American feminists  
27. According to the passage, which of the following would be the most accurate 
description of the society envisioned by most Saint -Simonians?  
(A) A society in which women were highly regarded for their extensive education  
(B) A society in which the two genders played complementary roles and had 
equal status  
(C) A society in which women did not enter public life  
(D) A social order in whic h a body of men and women would rule together on the 
basis of their spiritual power  
(E) A social order in which distinctions between male and female would not exist 
and all would share equally in political power  
SECTION B 
Historically, a cornerstone of classical empiricism has been the notion that every true 
generalization must be confirmable  by specific observations. In classical  empiricism, the truth of 
All balls are red,  for example, is assessed by inspecting balls; any observation of a non red ball 
refutes unequivocally the proposed generalization.  
For W. V. O. Quine, however, th is constitutes an overly narrow  conception of empiricism. 
All balls are red,  he maintains, forms one strand within an entire web of statements (our 
knowledge); individual observations can be referred only to this web as a whole. As new 
observations are  collected, he explains , they must be integrated into the web. Problems occur 
only if a contradiction develops between a new observation, say, That ball is blue,  and the 
preexisting statements. In that case, he argues,  any statement or combination of sta tements 
(not merely the offending  generalization, as in classical empiricism) can be altered to achieve 
the fundamental requirement, a system free of contradictions, even if, in some cases, the 
alteration consists of labeling the new observation a hallucination.  
17. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with presenting  
(A) criticisms of Quine s views on the proper conceptualization of empiricism  
(B) evidence to support Quine s claims about the problems inherent in classical 
empiricism  482 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) an account of Quine s counterproposal to one of the traditional assumptions 
of classical empiricism  
(D) an overview of classical empiricism and its contributions to Quine s alternate 
understanding of empiricism  
(E) a history of classical empiricism and Quine s reservations about it  
18. According to Quine s conception of empir icism, if a new observation were to 
contradict some statement already within our system of knowledge, which of the 
following would be tr ue? 
(A) The new observation would be rejected as untrue.  
(B) Both the observation and the statement in our system that it contradicted 
would be discarded.  
(C) New observations would be added to our web of statements in order to 
expand our system of knowled ge. 
(D) The observation or some part of our web of statements would need to be 
adjusted to resolve the contradiction.  
(E) An entirely new field of knowledge would be created.  
19. As described in the passage, Quine s specific argument against classical 
empiricism would be most strengthened if he did which of the following?  
(A) Provided evidence that many observations a re actually hallucinations.  
(B) Explained why new observations often invalidate preexisting generalizations.  
(C) Challenged the mechanism by which specific generalizations are derived 
from collections of particular observations.  
(D) Mentioned other critics  of classical empiricism and the substance of their 
approaches.  
(E) Gave an example of a specific generalization that has not been invalidated 
despite a contrary observation.  
20. It can be inferred from the passage that Quine considers classical empiricism to 
be overly narrow  (lines 7 -8) for which of the follo wing reasons?  
I. Classical empiricism requires that our system of generalizations be free of 
contradictions.  
II. Classical empiricism demands that in the case of a contradiction between an 
individual observation and a generalization, the generalization mus t be 
abandoned.  
III. Classical empiricism asserts that every observation will either confirm an 
existing generalization or initiate a new generalization.  
(A) II only  
(B) I and II only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only   GRE  483 
 (E) I, II, and III  
Until recently astronomers have been puzzled by the fate of red giant  and supergiant stars. 
When the core of a giant star whose mass surpasses 1.4 times the present mass of our Sun (M
) exhausts its nuclear fuel, it is unable to support its own weight and collapses into a tiny 
neutron star . The gravitational energy released during this implosion of the core blows off the 
remainder of the star in a gigantic explosion, or a supernova. Since around 50 perc ent of all 
stars are believed to begin their lives with masses greater than 1.4M , we might expect that 
one out of every two stars would die as a supernova. But in fact, only one star in thirty dies such 
a violent death. The rest expire much more peacefull y as planetary nebulas. Apparently most 
massive stars manage to lose sufficient material that their masses drop below the critical value 
of 1.4 M  before they exhaust their nuclear fuel.  
Evidence supporting this view comes from observations of IRC+10216, a  pulsating giant 
star located 700 light -years away from Earth. A huge rate of mass loss (1 M  every 10,000 
years) has been deduced from infrared observations of ammonia (NH 3) molecules located in the 
circumste llar cloud around IRC+10216. Recent microwave observations of carbon monoxide 
(CO) molecules indicate a similar rate of mass loss and demonstrate that the escaping material 
extends outward from the star for a distance of at least one light -year. Because we  know the 
size of the cloud around IRC+10216 and can use our observations of either NH 3 or CO to 
measure the outflow velocity, we can calculate an age for the circumstellar cloud. IRC+10216 
has apparently expelled, in the form of molecules and dust grains,  a mass equal to that of our 
entire Sun within the past ten thousand years. This implies that some stars can shed huge 
amounts of matter very quickly and thus may never expire as supernovas. Theoretical models 
as well as statistics on supernovas and planet ary nebulas suggest that stars that begin their 
lives with masses around 6 M  shed sufficient material to drop below the critical value of 1.4  M
. IRC+10216, for example, should do this in a mere 50,000 years from its birth, only an instant 
in the life of a star.  
But what place does IRC+10216 have in stellar evolution? Astronomers  suggest that stars 
like IRC+10216 are actually protoplanetary nebulas old giant stars whose dense cores have 
almost but not quite rid themselves of the fluffy envelopes of gas around them. Once the star 
has lost the entire envelope, its exposed core bec omes the central star of the planetary nebula  
and heats and ionizes the last vestiges of the envelope as it flows away into spac e. This 
configuration is a full -fledged planetary nebula, long familiar to optical astronomers.  
21. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) offer a method of calculating the age of circumstellar clouds  
(B) describe the conditions that result in a star s expiring as a supernova  
(C) discuss new evidence concerning the composition of planetary nebulas  
(D) explain why fewer stars than predicted expire as supernovas  
(E) survey conflicting theories concerning the composition of circumstellar 
clouds  
22. The passage implies that at the beginning of the life of IRC+10216, its mass was 
approximately  484 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) 7.0 M  
(B) 6.0 M  
(C) 5.0 M  
(D) 1.4 M  
(E) 1.0 M  
23. The view  to which line 18 refers serves to  
(A) reconcile seemingly contradictory facts  
(B) undermine a previously held theory  
(C) take into account data previously held to be insignificant  
(D) resolve a controversy  
(E) question new methods of gathering data  
24. It can be inferred from the passage that the author assumes which of the 
following in the discussion of the rate at which IRC+10216 loses mass?  
(A) The circumstellar cloud surrounding IRC+10216 consists only of CO and 
NH 3 molecules.  
(B) The circumstellar cloud surrounding IRC+10216 consists of material expelled 
from that star.  
(C) The age of a star is equal to that of its circumstellar cloud.  
(D) The rate at which IRC+10216 loses mass varies significantly from year to 
year.  
(E) Stars with a mass greater than 6 M  lose mass at a rate faster than stars with 
a mass less than 6 M  do. 
25. According to information provided by the passage, which of the following stars 
would astronomers most likely describe as a planetary nebula ? 
(A) A star that began its life with a mass of 5.5 M , has exhausted its nuclear fuel, 
and has a core that is visible to astronomers  
(B) A star that began its life with a mass of 6 M , lost mass at a rate of 1 M  per 
10,000 years, and exhausted its nuclea r fuel in 40,000 years  
(C) A star that has exhausted its nuclear fuel, has a mass of 1.2 M , and is 
surrounded by a circumstellar cloud that obscures its core from view  
(D) A star that began its life with a mass greater than 6 M , has just recently 
exhaust ed its nuclear fuel, and is in the process of releasing massive amounts 
of gravitational energy  
(E) A star that began its life with a mass of 5.5 M , has yet to exhaust its nuclear 
fuel, and exhibits a rate of mass loss similar to that of IRC+10216  
26. Which of the following statements would be most likely to follow the last 
sentence of the passage?  
(A) Supernovas are not necessarily the most spectacular events that astronomers  GRE  485 
 have occasion to observe.  
(B) Apparently, stars that have a mass of greater t han 6 M  are somewhat rare.  
(C) Recent studies of CO and NH 3 in the circumstellar clouds of stars similar to 
IRC+10216 have led astronomers to believe that the formation of planetary 
nebulas precedes the development of supernovas.  
(D) It appears, then, that IRC+1 0216 actually represents an intermediate step in 
the evolution of a giant star into a planetary nebula.  
(E) Astronomers have yet to develop a consistently accurate method for 
measuring the rate at which a star exhausts its nuclear fuel.  
27. Which of the  following titles best summarizes the content of the passage?  
(A) New Methods of Calculating the Age of Circumstellar Clouds  
(B) New Evidence Concerning the Composition of Planetary Nebulas  
(C) Protoplanetary Nebula: A Rarely Observed Phenomenon  
(D) Planet ary Nebulas: An Enigma to Astronomers  
(E) The Diminution of a Stars Mass: A Crucial Factor in Stellar Evolution  
No. 9 -6 
SECTION A  
(This passage is from an article published in 1973)  
The recent change to all -volunteer armed forces in the United States will eventually 
produce a gradual incr ease in the proportion of women in the armed forces and in the variety of 
women s assignments, but probably not the dramatic gains for women that might have been 
expected. This is so even though the armed forces operate in an ethos of institutional change 
oriented toward occupational equality and under the federal sanction of equal pay for equal 
work. The difficulty is that women are unlikely to be trained for any direct combat operations. A 
significant portion of the larger society remains uncomfortable as  yet with extending equality in 
this direction. Therefore, for women in the military, the search for equality will still be based on 
functional equivalence, not identity or even similarity of task. Opportunities seem certain to 
arise. The growing emphasis on deterrence is bound to offer increasing scope for women to 
become involved in novel types of noncombat military assignments.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) present an overview of the different types of assignments available to women 
in the new United States all -volunteer armed forces  
(B) present a reasoned  prognosis of the status of women in the new United States 
all-volunteer armed forces  
(C) present the new United States all -volunteer armed forces as a mod el case of 
equal employment policies in action  
(D) analyze reforms in the new United States all -volunteer armed forces 486 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 necessitated by the increasing number of women in the military  
(E) analyze the use of functional equivalence as a substitute for occup ational 
equality in the new United States all -volunteer armed forces  
18. According to the passage, despite the United States armed forces commitment to 
occupational equality for women in the military, certain other factors preclude 
womens  
(A) receiving e qual pay for equal work  
(B) having access to positions of responsibility at most levels  
(C) drawing assignments from a wider range of assignments than before  
(D) benefiting from opportunities arising from new noncombat functions  
(E) being assigned all of the military tasks that are assigned to men  
19. The passage implies that which of the following is a factor conducive to a more 
equitable representation  of women in the United States armed forces than  has 
existed in the past?  
(A) The all -volunteer character of the present armed forces  
(B) The past service records of women who had assignments functionally 
equivalent to men s assignments  
(C) The level of awareness on the part of the larger society of military issues  
(D) A decline  in the proportion of deterrence oriented noncombat assignments  
(E) Restrictive past policies governing the military assignments open to women  
20. The dramatic gains for women  (line 5) and the attitude, as described in lines 
11-12, of a significant portion of the larger society  are logically related to each 
other inasmuch as  the author puts forward the latter as  
(A) a public response to achievement of the former  
(B) the major reason for absence of the former  
(C) a precondition for any prospect of achieving the former  
(D) a catalyst for a fu rther extension of the former  
(E) a reason for some of the former being lost again  
Of the thousands of specimens of meteorites found on Earth and known to science, only 
about 100 are igneous; that is, they have undergone melting by volcanic action at so me time 
since the planets were first formed. These igneous meteorites are known as achondrites 
because they lack chondrules small stony spherules found in the thousands of meteorites 
(called chondrites ) composed primarily of unaltered minerals that conde nsed from dust and 
gas at the origin of the solar system. Achondrites are the only known samples of volcanic rocks 
originating outside the Earth -Moon system. Most are thought to have been dislodged by 
interbody impact from asteroids, with diameters of from  10 to 500 kilometers, in solar orbit 
between Mars and Jupiter.  
Shergottites, the name given to three anomalous achondrites so far discovered on Earth, 
present scientists with a genuine enigma. Shergottites crystallized from molten rock less than  GRE  487 
 1.1 billi on years ago (some 3.5 billion years later than typical achondrites) and were  
presumably ejected into space when an object impacted on a body similar in chemical 
composition to Earth.  
While most meteorites appear to derive from comparatively small bodies, shergottites 
exhibit properties that indicate that their source was a large planet, conceivably Mars. In order 
to account for such an unlikely source, some unusual factor must be invoked, because the 
impact needed to accelerate a fragment of rock to escape  the gravitational field of a body even 
as small as the Moon is so great that no meteorites of lunar origin have been discovered.  
While some scientists speculate that shergotti tes derive from Io (a volcanically active moon 
of Jupiter), recent measurements suggest that since Io s surface is rich in sulfur and sodium, 
the chemical composition of its volcanic products would probably be unlike that of the 
shergottites. Moreover, any fragments dislodged from Io by interbody impact would be unlikely 
to escape the  gravitational pull of Jupiter.  
The only other logical source of shergottites is Mars. Space -probe photographs indicate the 
existence of giant volcanoes on the Martian surface. From the small number of impact craters 
that appear on Martian lava flows, one can estimate that the planet was volcanically active as 
recently as a half -billion years ago and may be active today. The great objection to the Martian 
origin of shergottites is the absence of lunar meteorites on Earth. An impact capable of ejecting 
a fragment of the Martian surface into an Earth -intersecting orbit is even less probable than 
such an event on the Moon, in view of  the Moon s smaller size and closer proximity to Earth. A 
recent study suggests, however, that permafrost ices below the surface of Mars may have 
altered the effects of impact on it. If the ices had been rapidly vaporized by an impacting object, 
the expanding gases might have helped the ejected fragments reach escape velocity . Finally, 
analyses performed by space probes show a remarkable chemical similarity between Martian 
soil and the shergottites.  
21. The passage implies which of the following about shergottites?  
I. They are products of volcanic activity.  
II. They derive from a planet larger than Earth.  
III. They come from a planetary body with a chemical composition similar to 
that of Io.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
22. According to the passage, a meteorite discovered on Earth is unlikely to have 
come from a large planet  for which of the following reasons?  
(A) There are fewer large planets in the solar system than there are asteroids.  
(B) Most l arge planets have been volcanically inactive for more than a billion 
years.  488 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) The gravitational pull of a large planet would probably prohibit fragments 
from  escaping  its orbit.  
(D) There are no chondrites occurring naturally on Earth and probably none o n 
other large planets.  
(E) Interbody impact is much rarer on large than  on small planets because of the 
density of the atmosphere on large planets.  
23. The passage suggests that the age of shergottites is probably  
(A) still entirely undetermined  
(B) less than that of most ot her achondrites  
(C) about 3.5 billion years  
(D) the same as that of typical achondrites  
(E) greater than that of the Earth  
24. According to the passage, the presence of chondrules in a meteorite indicates that 
the meteorite  
(A) has probably come from Ma rs 
(B) is older than the solar system itself  
(C) has not been melted since the solar system formed  
(D) is certainly less than 4 billion years old  
(E) is a small fragment of an asteroid  
25. The passage provides information to answer which of the followin g questions?  
(A) What is the precise age of the solar system?  
(B) How did shergottites get their name?  
(C) What are the chemical properties shared by shergottites and Martian soils?  
(D) How volcanically active is the planet Jupiter?  
(E) What is a major feature of the Martian surface?  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that each of the following is a consideration in 
determining whether a particular planet is a possible source of shergottites that 
have been discovered on Earth EXCEPT the  
(A) planet s size 
(B) planet s distance from Earth  
(C) strength of the planet s field of gravity  
(D) proximity of the planet to its moons  
(E) chemical composition of the planet s surface  
27. It can be inferred from the passage that most meteorites found on Earth contain 
which of the following?  
(A) Crystals  
(B) Chondrules   GRE  489 
 (C) Metals  
(D) Sodium  
(E) Sulfur  
SECTION B 
The transplantation o f organs from one individual to another normally involves two major 
problems: (1) organ rejection is likely unless the transplantation antigens  of both individuals are 
nearly identical, and (2) the introduction of any unmatched transplantation antigens induces 
the development by the recipient of donor -specific lymphocytes that will produce violent 
rejection of further transplantations from that don or. However, we have found that among 
many strains of rats these normal rules of transplantation are not obeyed by liver transplants. 
Not only are liver transplants never rejected, but they even induce a state of donor -specific 
unresponsiveness in which subsequent transplants of other organs, such as skin, from that 
donor are accepted permanently. Our hypothesis is that (1) many strains of rats simply cannot 
mount a sufficiently vigorous destructive immune -response (using lymphocytes) to outstrip the 
livers relatively great capacity to protect itself from immune -response damage and that (2) the 
systemic unresponsiveness observed is due to concentration of the recipient s donor -specific 
lymphocytes at the site of the liver transplant.  
17. The primary purpo se of the passage is to treat the accepted generalizations about 
organ transplantation in which of the following ways?  
(A) Explicate their main features  
(B) Suggest an alternative to them  
(C) Examine their virtues and limitations  
(D) Criticize the major ev idence used to support  them  
(E) Present findings that qualify them  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that the author believes that an important 
difference among strains of rats is the  
(A) size of their livers  
(B) constitution of their skin  
(C) strength of their immune -response reactions  
(D) sensitivity of their antigens  
(E) adaptability of their lymphocytes  
19. According to the hypothesis of the author, after a successful liver transplant, the 
reason that rats do not reject further transplants o f other organs from the same 
donor is that the  
(A) transplantation antigens of the donor and the recipient become matched  
(B) lymphocytes of the recipient are weakened by the activity of the transplanted 
liver 
(C) subsequently transplanted organ is able to  repair the damage caused by the 490 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 recipients immune -response reaction  
(D) transplanted liver continues to be the primary locus for the recipients 
immune -response reaction  
(E) recipient is unable to manufacture the lymphocytes necessary for the 
immune -response reaction  
20. Which of the following new findings about strains of rats that do not normally 
reject liver transplants, if true, would support the authors hypothesi s? 
I. Stomach transplants are accepted by the recipients in all cases.  
II. Increasing the strength of the recipients immune -response reaction can 
induce liver -transplant rejection.  
III. Organs from any other donor can be transplanted without rejection aft er liver 
transplantation.  
IV . Preventing lymphocytes from being concentrated at the liver transplant 
produces acceptance of skin transplants.  
(A) II only  
(B) I and III only  
(C) II and IV only  
(D) I, II, and III only  
(E) I, III, and IV only  
Practically speaking, the artistic maturing of the cinema was the single -handed 
achievement of David W. Griffith (1875 -1948). Before Griffith, photography in dramatic films 
consisted of little more than  placing the actors before a stationary camera and showing them in 
full length as they would have appeared on stage. From the beginning of his career as a director, 
however, Griffith, because of his love of Victorian painting, employed composition. H e 
conceived of the camera image as having a foreground and a rear ground, as well as the middle 
distance preferred by most directors. By 1910 he was using close -ups to reveal significant 
details of the scene or of the acting and extreme long shots to achie ve a sense of spectacle and 
distance. His appreciation of the cameras possibilities produced novel dramatic effects. By 
splitting an event into fragments and recording each from the most suitable camera position, he 
could significantly vary the emphasis f rom camera shot to camera shot.  
Griffith also achieved dramatic effects by means of creative editing. By juxtaposing images 
and varying the speed and rhythm of their presentation, he could control the dramatic intensity 
of the events as the story progresse d. Despite the reluctance of his producers, who feared that 
the public would not be able to follow a plot that was made up of such juxtaposed images, 
Griffith persisted, and experimented as well with other elements of cinematic syntax that have 
become stan dard ever since . These included the flashback, permitting broad psychological and 
emotional exploration as well as narrative that was not chronological, and the crosscut between 
two parallel actions to heighten suspense and excitem ent. In thus exploiting fully the 
possibilities of editing, Griffith transposed devices of the Victorian novel to film and gave film 
mastery of time as well as space.  
Besides developing the cinemas language, Griffith immensely broadened its range and  GRE  491 
 treatment of subjects. His early output was remarkably eclectic: it included not only the 
standard comedies, melodramas, westerns, and thrillers, but also such novelties as adaptations 
from Browning and Tennyson, and treatments of social issues. As his success es mounted, his 
ambitions grew, and with them the whole of American cinema. When he remade Enoch Arden  
in 1911, he insisted that a subject of such importance could not be treated in the then 
conventional length of one reel. Griffiths introduction of the A merican -made multireel picture 
began an immense revolution. Two years later, Judith of Bethulia , an elaborate 
historicophilosophical spectacle, reached the unprecedented length of four reels, or one hours 
running time . From our contemporary viewpoint, the pretensions of this film may seem a trifle 
ludicrous, but at the time it provoked endless debate and discussion and gave a new intellectual 
respectability to the cinema.  
21. The primary purpose of the pa ssage is to  
(A) discuss the importance of Griffith to the development of the cinema  
(B) describe the impact on cinema of the flashback and other editing innovations  
(C) deplore the state of American cinema before the advent of Griffith  
(D) analyze the chan ges in the cinema wrought by the introduction of the 
multireel film  
(E) document Griffiths impact on the choice of subject matter in American films  
22. The author suggests that Griffiths film innovations had a direct effect on all of 
the following EXCEPT:  
(A) film editing  
(B) camera work  
(C) scene composing  
(D) sound  editing  
(E) directing  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that before 1910 the normal running time of a 
film was  
(A) 15 minutes or less  
(B) between 15 and 30 minutes  
(C) between 30 and 45 minutes  
(D) between 45 minutes and 1 hour  
(E) 1 hour or m ore 
24. The author asserts that Griffith introduced all of the following into American 
cinema EXCEPT:  
(A) consideration of social issues  
(B) adaptations from Tennyson  
(C) the flashback and other editing techniques  
(D) photographic approaches inspired by Vi ctorian painting  492 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) dramatic plots suggested by Victorian theater  
25. The author suggests that Griffiths contributions to the cinema had which of the 
following results?  
I. Literary works, especially Victorian novels, became popular sources for film 
subjects.  
II. Audi ence appreciation of other film directors experimentations with 
cinematic syntax was increased.  
III. Many of the artistic limitations thought to be inherent in filmmaking were 
shown to be really nonexistent.  
(A) II only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that Griffith would be most likely to agree 
with which of the following statements?  
(A) The good director will attempt to explore new ideas as quickly as possible.  
(B) The most important elemen t contributing to a films success is the ability of 
the actors.  
(C) The camera must be considered an integral and active element in the creation 
of a film.  
(D) The cinema should emphasize serious and sober examinations of fundamental 
human problems.  
(E) The proper composition of scenes in a film is more important than the details 
of their editing.  
27. The authors attitude toward photography in the cinema before Griffith can best 
be described as  
(A) sympathetic  
(B) nostalgic  
(C) amused  
(D) condescending  
(E) hostile  
GRE   RC  
1990 04   
SECTION A   GRE  493 
 Because of its accuracy in outlining the Earth s subsurface, the seismic -reflection method 
remains the most important tool in the search for petroleum reserves . In field practice,  a 
subsurface is mapped by arranging a series of wave -train sources, such as small dynamite 
explosions, in a grid pattern. As each source is activated, it generates a wave train that moves 
downward at a speed determined uniquely by the rock s elastic chara cteristics. As rock 
interfaces are crossed, the elastic characteristics encountered generally change abruptly, which 
causes part of the energy to be reflected back to the surface, where it is recorded by seismic 
instruments. The seismic records must be pro cessed to correct for positional differences 
between the source and the receiver, for unrelated wave trains, and for multiple reflections 
from the rock interfaces. Then the data acquired at each of the specific source locations are 
combined to generate a p hysical profile of the subsurface, which can eventually be used to 
select targets for drilling.  
17. The passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) describing an important technique  
(B) discussing a new method  
(C) investigating a controversial procedure  
(D) an nouncing a significant discovery  
(E) promoting a novel application  
18. According to the passage, in the seismic -reflection method all of the following 
have a significant effect on the signal detected by the seismic instruments 
EXCEPT the  
(A) presence of  unrelated wave trains  
(B) placement of the seismic instruments  
(C) number of sources in the grid pattern  
(D) nature of the reflectivity of the rock interfaces  
(E) properties of rocks through which the wave  train has traveled  
19. It can be inferred from  the passage that the seismic -reflection method would be 
likely to yield an inaccurate physical profile of the subsurface in which of the 
following circumstances?  
(A) If the speed at which the wave train moved downward changed  
(B) If the receiver were not positioned directly at the wave -train source  
(C) If the rock on one side of a rock interface had similar elastic characteristics to 
those of the rock on the other side  
(D) If the seismic records obtained for the different sources in a grid were highly 
similar to each other  
(E) If there were no petroleum deposits beneath the area defined by the grid of 
wave -train sources  
20. Which of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A method is criticized, and an alternative is suggested.  494 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) An illustration is examined, and some errors are exposed.  
(C) An assertion is made, and a procedure is outlined.  
(D) A series of examples is presented, and a conclusion is drawn.  
(E) A hypothesis is advanced, and supporting evidence is supplied.  
Modern archaeological finds can still contribute much to the study of ancient literature. For 
example, forty years ago a survey of the early Greek dramatist Aeschylus  plays would have 
started with The Suppliant Women. Many factors internal to the play, but p erhaps most 
especially the prominence of the chorus (which in this play has the main role), led scholars to 
consider it one of Aeschylus  earlier works. The consensus was that  here was a drama truly 
reflecting an early stage in the evolution of tragedy out  of choral lyric. The play was dated as 
early as the 490 s B.C., in any event , well before Aeschylus  play The Persians of 472 B.C. Then, 
in 1952, a fragment of papyrus found at Oxyrhynchus was published stating the official 
circumstan ces and results of a dramatic contest. The fragment announced that Aeschylus won 
first prize with his Danaid tetralogy, of which The Suppliant Women is the opening play, and 
defeated Sophocles in the process. Sophocles did not compete in any dramatic conte st before 
468 B.C., when he won his first victory. Hence, except by special pleading (e. g., that the 
tetralogy was composed early in Aeschylus  career but not produced  until the 460 s B.C.), the 
Danaid tetralogy must be put after 468 B.C. In addition, a f ew letters in the fragment suggest 
the name Archedemides, archon in 463 B.C., thus perhaps tying the plays to that precise date, 
almost exactly halfway between Aeschylus  Seven Against Thebes of 467 B.C. and his Oresteia . 
The implication of the papyrus adm inistered a severe shock to the vast majority of classical 
scholars, who had confidently asserted that not only the role of the chorus but also language, 
metrics, and characterization all pointed to an early date. The discovery has resulted in no less 
than a total reevaluation of every chronological criterion that has been applied to or derived 
from Aeschylus  plays. The activity has been brisk, and a new creed has now spread. The 
prominence of the chorus in The Suppliant Women now is seen not as a sign of primitivism but 
as analogous to the massive choral songs of the Oresteia . Statistics have been formulated, or 
reformulated, to show that stylistically The Suppliant Women  does actually occupy a position 
after The Persians  and Seven Against Thebes, which no w become the primitive  plays, and 
before the Oresteia . While the new doctrine seems almost certainly correct, the one papyrus 
fragment raises the specter that another may be unearthed, showing, for instance, that it was a 
posthumous production of the Dan aid tetralogy which bested Sophocles, and throwing the date 
once more into utter confusion. This is unlikely to happen, but it warns us that perhaps the 
most salutary feature of the papyrus scrap is its message of the extreme difficulty of classifying 
and categorizing rigidly the development of a creative artist.  
21. The author of the passage focuses primarily on  
(A) discussing a series of modern archaeological finds and their impact on the 
study of Greek literature  
(B) recounting the effect of one archaeol ogical  find on modern ideas concerning a 
particular author s work  
(C) giving a definitive and coherent account of  the chronology of a particular 
author s work   GRE  495 
 (D) illustrating the many varieties of difficulties involved in establishing facts 
concerning anc ient literature  
(E) determining the exact value of archaeological finds in relation to the history 
of ancient literature  
22. With respect to the study of ancient literature, which of the following statements 
best expresses the author s main point concer ning modern archaeological finds?  
(A) They can profoundly alter accepted views  of ancient literary works, and can 
encourage flexibility in the way scholars look at the creative development of 
any artist.  
(B) They can be severely shocking and can have a rev ivifying effect on the study 
of ancient  literature, which has recently suffered from a lack of interest on 
the part of scholars.  
(C) They can raise more questions than they answer and can be unreliable sources 
of information.  
(D) They generally confirm sch olars  ideas about ancient literary works and allow 
them to dispense with inferences drawn from the  works  internal structure.  
(E) They often undermine scholarly consensus in certain areas and create utter 
confusion  concerning an author s work.  
23. Acco rding to the passage, in the absence of definite  knowledge concerning the 
dates of composition of ancient literary works, literary historians do which of the 
following when trying  to establish the chronology of an author s work?  
(A) Make assumptions about a single work s date  of composition if such 
assumptions would not seriously affect interpretations of other works by the 
same author.  
(B) Draw inferences concerning the date of a work s composition based on 
evidence internal to that work and on the author s other works.  
(C) Ignore the date of a work s composition  which  is supplied by archaeological  
research when  literary factors internal  to the work contradict that date.  
(D) Refrain from speculation concerning a  work s date of composition unless 
archaeologi cal find s produce information  concerning it.  
(E) Estimate the date of a work s composition without attempting to relate it to 
the author s development as an artist.  
24. It can be inferred from the passage that  which of the following plays or groups of  
plays is considered the latest in the date  of its composition?  
(A) The Persians  
(B) The Danaid tetralogy  
(C) The Oresteia  
(D) Seven Against Thebes  
(E) The Suppliant Women  496 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 25. With which of the following statements regarding the chronological criteria 
mentioned in line 33-34 would the author  be mos t likely to agree?  
(A) Such criteria, whether applied to or derived from the plays, should only be 
used to confirm  already existing knowledge.  
(B) Such criteria, although derived from  reliable external and internal evidence, 
should be changed continually t o avoid  rigidity in thinking.  
(C) Such criteria, based on statistical analysis, are inherently more reliable than 
those of forty years ago.  
(D) Such criteria, even when unsupported by  external evidence, can resolve most 
questions.  
(E) Such criteria, based on often ambiguous internal evidence, can lead to 
erroneous reconstructions of the chronology of an author s work.  
26. The author s attitude toward the activity  mentioned in line 35 and its 
consequences  can best be described as one of  
(A) amused tolerance  
(B) mocking envy  
(C) grave doubt  
(D) angry disapproval  
(E) unrestrained enthusiasm  
27. The allusion to the hypothetical papyrus fragment in line  45-49 does which of the 
following?  
(A) Supports an argument concerning the da te of The Suppliant Women . 
(B) Refutes the views of the majority of scholars concerning the Oxyrhynchus 
papyrus  find. 
(C) Predicts the future results of archaeological research proposed in the passage.  
(D) Undermines the validity of the currently accepted chronology of Aeschylus  
works.  
(E) Qualifies  the author s agreement with the  new creed  developed since the 
Oxyrhynchus papyrus find.  
SECTION B 
Scholars often fail to see that music  played an important role in the  preservati on of African 
culture in the United States. They correctly note  that slavery stripped  some cultural  elements 
from Black people their political and economic systems but they underestimate the 
significance of  music in sustaining other African  cultural values . African music, unlike the music 
of some other cultures, was based on a total vision  of life in which music was not an  isolated 
social domain. In African culture music was pervasive, serving  not only religion, but all phases 
of life, including birth, deat h, work, and play. The methods that a community  devises to 
perpetuate itself come into  being to preserve aspects of the cultural legacy that that community  
perceives as essential. Music, like  art in general, was so inextricably a  part of African culture  GRE  497 
 that it became  a crucial means of preserving the  culture during and after the  dislocations  of 
slavery.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) analyze the impact that slavery had on African political and economic 
systems  
(B) review the attempt of re cent scholarship to study the influence of African 
music on other music  
(C) correct the failure of some scholars to appreciate the significance of music  in 
African culture  
(D) survey the ways by which people attempt  to preserve their culture against the 
effects of oppression  
(E) compare the relative importance of music with that of other art forms in 
culture  
18. In line 9, the phrase isolated social  domain  refers  to 
(A) African music in relation to contemporary culture as a whole  
(B) music as it may be perceived in non -African cultures  
(C) a feature of African music that aided in transmitting African cultural values  
(D) an aspect of the African cultural legacy  
(E) the influence of music on contemporary culture  
19. Which of the following statements concerning the functi on of African music can 
be inferred from the passage?  
(A) It preserved cultural values because it was thoroughly integrated into the lives 
of the people.  
(B) It was more important in the development of African religious life than in 
other areas of culture.  
(C) It was developed in response to the loss of political and economic systems.  
(D) Its pervasiveness in African culture hindered its effectiveness in minimizing 
the impact of slavery.  
(E) Its isolation from the economic domains of life enabled it to survive the 
destructive impact of slavery.  
20. According to the author, scholars would err in  drawing which of the following 
conclusions?  
I. Slavery stripped the slav es of their political and economic systems.  
II. African music was similar to all other traditions of music in that it originated 
in a total vision of life.  
III. Music was a crucial part of the African cultural legacy.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  498 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) I and II on ly 
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
Traditionally, pollination by wind has  been viewed as a reproductive process  marked by 
random events in which the  vagaries  of the wind are compensat ed for by the generation of vast 
quantities of  pollen, so that the ultimate production of new seeds is assured at the expense of  
producing much more pollen than is  actually used. Because the potential hazards pollen grains 
are subject to as  they are transp orted over long distances are enormous, wind -pollinated plants 
have, in the view above, compensated for the  ensuing loss of pollen through  happenstance by 
virtue of producing an  amount of pollen that is one to three  orders of magnitude greater than 
the amount produced by species pollinated by insects.  
However, a number of features that are  characteristic of wind -pollinated plants  reduce 
pollen waste. For example, many  wind-pollinated species fail to release pollen when wind 
speeds are low or when  humid cond itions prevail. Recent studies  suggest another way in which 
species  compensate for the inefficiency of wind pollination. These studies suggest that  species 
frequently take advantage of  the physics of pollen motion by generating specific aerodynamic 
environments within  the immediate vicinity of their female  reproductive organs. It is the  
morphology of these organs that dictates  the pattern of airflow disturbances  through which 
pollen must travel. The  speed and direction of the airflow disturbances can combine with the  
physical properties of a species  pollen  to produce a species -specific pattern of  pollen collision 
on the surfaces of  female reproductive organs. Provided  that these surf aces are strategically 
located, the consequences of this  combination can significantly increase  the pollen -capture 
efficiency of a female reproductive organ . 
A critical question that remains to be  answered is whether the morphological  attributes of 
the female reproductive  organs of wind -pollinated species are  evolutionary adaptations to wind  
pollination or are merely fortuitous. A  complete resolution of t he question is as yet impossible 
since adaptation must be  evaluated for each species within its own  unique functional context. 
However, it  must be said that, while evidence of such evolutionary adaptations does exist in  
some species, one must be careful ab out attributing morphology to  adaptation. For example, 
the spiral arrangement of  scale-bract complexes on ovule -bearing  pine cones, where the female 
reproductive  organs of conifers are located, is  important  to the production of airflow  patterns 
that spiral  over the cone s surfaces, thereby passing airborne pollen  from one scale to the next. 
However, these patterns cannot be viewed as an  adaptation to wind pollination because the 
spiral arrangement occurs in a number  of non -wind-pollinated plant lineages and  is regarded as 
a characteristic of  vascular plants, of which conifers are  only one kind, as a whole. Therefore, 
the spiral arrangement is  not likely to be  the result of a direct adaptation to wind pollination.  
21. The author of the passage is  primarily co ncerned with discussing  
(A) the current debate on whether the morphological attributes of wind -pollinated 
plants are evolutionary adaptations  
(B) the kinds of airflow patterns that permit wind -pollinated plants to capture 
pollen most efficiently  
(C) the wa ys in which the reproductive processes of wind -pollinated plants are  GRE  499 
 controlled by random events  
(D) a recently proposed explanation of a way in which wind -pollinated plants 
reduce pollen waste  
(E) a specific morphological attribute that permits one species of wind -pollinated 
plant to capture pollen  
22. The author suggests that explanations of wind pollination that emphasize the 
production of vast quantities of pollen to compensate for the ra ndomness of the 
pollination process are  
(A) debatable and misleading  
(B) ingenious and convincing  
(C) accurate but incomplete  
(D) intriguing but controversial  
(E) plausible but unverifiable  
23. According to the passage, the aerodynamic  environments  mentioned in line 23, 
when  they are produced, are primarily determined  by the  
(A) presence of insects near the plant  
(B) physical properties of the plant s pollen  
(C) shape of the plant s female reproductive organs  
(D) amount of pollen generated by the plant  
(E) number of seeds produced by the plant  
24. According to the passage, true statements  about the release of pollen by  
wind -pollinated plants include which of the  following?  
I. The release can be affected by certain environmental factors.  
II. The amoun t of pollen released increases on a rainy day.  
III. Pollen is sometimes not released by plants when there is little wind.  
(A) II only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) I and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
25. The passage suggests that the recent studies c ited in lines 19-21 have not done 
which of the following?  
(A) Made any distinctions between different species of wind -pollinated plants.  
(B) Considered the physical properties of the  pollen  that is produced by 
wind -pollinated plants.  
(C) Indicated the gene ral range within which plant -generated airflow disturbances 
are apt to occur.  
(D) Included investigations of the physics of  pollen motion and its relationship to 500 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 the efficient capture of pollen by the female reproductive organs of 
wind -pollinated plants.  
(E) Demonstrated that the morphological attributes of the female reproductive 
organs of wind -pollinated plants are usually evolutionary adaptations to 
wind pollination.  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that the  claim  that the spiral arrangement of 
scale -bract complexes on an ovule -bearing  pine cone is an adaptation  to wind  
pollination would be more convincing if  which of the following were true?  
(A) Such an arrangement occurred only in  wind -pollinated plants.  
(B) Such an arrangement occurred in v ascular plants as a whole.  
(C) Such an arrangement could be shown to be beneficial to pollen release.  
(D) The number of bracts could be shown to have increased over time.  
(E) The airflow patterns over the cone s surfaces could be shown to be produced 
by such arrangements.  
27. Which of the following, if known, is likely  to have been the kind of evidence 
used to  support the view  described in the first  paragraph?  
(A) Wind speeds need not be very low for  wind -pollinated plants to fail to release  
pollen.  
(B) The female reproductive organs of plants  often have a sticky surface that 
allows them to trap  airborne pollen systematically.  
(C) Grasses, as well as conifers, generate  specific aerodynamic environments 
within  the immediate vicinity of their reproductive organs.  
(D) Rain showers often wash airborne pollen out of the air before it ever reaches 
an appropriate plant.  
(E) The density and size of an airborne pollen grain are of equal importance in 
determining whether that grain will be captured by a plant.  
1990 10   
SECTION A  
It has been known for many decades  that the appearance of sunspots is  roughly periodic, 
with an average cycle  of eleven years. Moreover, the  incidence of solar flares and the flux  of 
solar cosmic rays, ultraviolet  radiation, and x -radiation all vary  directly with the sunspot cycle . 
But after more than a century of  investigation, the relation of these and  other phenomena, 
known collectively as  the solar -activity cycle, to terrestrial  weather and climate remains unclear. 
For example, the sunspot cycle and the  allied magnetic -polarity cycle have been linked to 
periodicit ies discerned in  records of such variables as rainfall, temperature, and winds. 
Invariably, however, the relation is weak, and  commonly of dubious statistical  significance.  
Effects of solar variability over  longer terms have also been sought. The  absence o f 
recorded sunspot activity in the notes kept by European observers in  the late seventeenth and  GRE  501 
 early eighteenth centuries has led some  scholars to postulate a brief cessation  of sunspot 
activity at that time (a  period called the Maunder minimum ). The Maunder minimum has been 
linked to a  span of unusual cold in Europe extending  from the sixteenth to the early nineteenth 
centuries. The reality of  the Maunder minimum has yet to be  established, however, especially 
since the records that Chin ese naked -eye observers of solar  activity made at that  time appear 
to contradict it. Scientists have also sought evidence of  long-term solar periodicities by  
examining indirect climatological data, such as fossil records of the thickness  of ancient tree 
rings. These studies, however, failed to link unequivocally  terrestrial climate and the 
solar-activity cycle, or even to confirm the cycle s past existence.  
If consistent and reliable geological  or archaeological evidence tracing the  solar-activity 
cycle in the distant past  could be found, it might also resolve an  important issue in solar physics: 
how to  model solar activity. Currently, there  are two models of solar activity. The  first supposes 
that the Sun s internal  motions (caused by rotation and  convectio n) interact with its  large-scale 
magnetic field to produce a  dynamo, a device in which mechanical  energy is converted into the 
energy of a  magnetic field. In short, the Sun s large-scale magnetic field is taken to  be 
self-sustaining, so that the  solar-activity cycle it drives would be  maintained with little overall 
change  for perhaps billions of years. The  alternative explanation supposes that  the Sun s 
large-scale magnetic field is  a remnant of the field the Sun acquired  when it formed, and is not 
sustaine d against decay. In this model, the solar  mechanism dependent on the Sun s magnetic 
field runs down more quickly. Thus, the characteristics of the  solar-activity cycle could be 
expected to change over a long period of time. Modern solar observations span t oo short  a time 
to reveal whether present cyclical solar activity is a long -lived feature of the Sun, or merely a  
transient phenomenon.  
17. The author focuses primarily on  
(A) presenting two competing scientific  theories concerning solar activity and  
evalu ating geological evidence often  cited to support them  
(B) giving a brief overview of some  recent scientific developments in solar  
physics and assessing their impact on  future climatological research  
(C) discussing the difficulties involved in linking terre strial phenomena with solar 
activity and indicating how resolving that issue could have an impact on our 
understanding of solar physics  
(D) pointing out the futility of a  certain line of scientific inquiry into  the 
terrestrial effects  of solar  activity and recommending its  abandonment in 
favor of purely  physics -oriented research  
(E) outlining the specific reasons why a  problem in solar physics has not yet  been 
solved and faulting the overly  theoretical approach of modern physicists  
18. Which of the following statements about the two models of solar activity, as they 
are described in lines 37-55, is accurate?  
(A) In both models cyclical solar activity  is regarded as a long -lived feature of the  
Sun, persisting with little change over  billions of years.  
(B) In both models the solar -activity cycle  is hypothesized as being dependent on 
the large -scale solar magnetic field.  502 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) In one model the Sun s magnetic field  is thought to play a role in causing  
solar activity, whereas in the other  model it is not.  
(D) In one model solar activity is  presumed to be unrelated to terrestrial  
phenomena, whereas in the other model  solar activity is thought to  have  
observable effects on the Earth.  
(E) In one model cycles of solar activity with  periodiciti es longer than a few 
decades ar e considered to be impossible, whereas  in the other model such 
cycles are predicted.  
19. According to the passage, late  seventeenth and early  eighteenth -century Chinese 
records are  important for which of the following  reasons ? 
(A) They suggest that the data on which  the Maunder minimum was predicated 
were incorrect.  
(B) They suggest that the Maunder minimum  cannot be related to climate.  
(C) They suggest that the Maunder minimum  might be valid only for Europe.  
(D) They establis h the existence of a  span of unusually cold weather worldwide  at 
the time of  the Maunder minimum.  
(E) They establish that solar activity at  the time of the Maunder minimum did not  
significantly vary from its present  pattern.  
20. The author implies which  of the  following about currently available  geological 
and archaeological evidence  concerning the solar -activity cycle?  
(A) It best supports the model of solar  activity described in lines 37-45. 
(B) It best supports the model of solar  activity described in  lines 45-52. 
(C) It is insufficient to confirm either  model of solar activity described in the  third 
paragraph.  
(D) It contradicts both models of solar  activity as they are presented in the  third 
paragraph.  
(E) It disproves the theory that  terrestrial weather and solar activity  are linked in 
some way.  
21. It can be inferred from the passage  that the argument in favor of the model  
described in lines 37-45 would be  strengthened if which of the following wer e 
found to be true?  
(A) Episodes of intense volcanic  eruptions in the distant past occurred  in cycles 
having very long  periodicities.  
(B) At the present time the global level  of thunderstorm activity increases and  
decreases in cycles with periodicities  of approximately 11 years.  
(C) In the distant past cyclical climatic  changes had periodicities of longer than  
200 years.  
(D) In the last century the length of the  sunspot cycle has been known to vary by  
as much as  2 years from its average  periodicity of 11 ye ars.  GRE  503 
 (E) Hundreds of millions of years ago, solar -activity cycles displayed the same  
periodicities  as do present -day solar -activity cycles.  
22. It can be inferred from the passage  that Chinese observations of the Sun  during 
the late seventeenth and earl y eighteenth centuries  
(A) are ambiguous because most sunspots  cannot be seen with the naked eye  
(B) probably were made under the same  weather conditions as those made in  
Europe  
(C) are more reliable than European  observations  made during this period  
(D) r ecord some sunspot activity during  this period  
(E) have been employed by scientists  seeking to argue that a change in solar  
activity occurred during this period  
23. It can be inferred from the passage  that studies attempting to use tree -ring 
thickness to locate possible links  between solar periodic ity and  terrestrial climate 
are based on which  of the following assumptions?  
(A) The solar -activity cycle existed in  its present form during the time period  in 
which the tree rings grew.  
(B) The biological mechanisms causing  tree growth are unaffected by s hort-term 
weather patterns.  
(C) Average tree -ring thickness varies  from species  to species.  
(D) Tree -ring thicknesses reflect changes  in terrestrial climate.  
(E) Both terrestrial climate and the  solar -activity cycle randomly affect  tree-ring 
thickness.  
The common belief of some linguists  that each language is a perfect vehicle  for the 
thoughts of the nation speaking  it is in some ways the exact  counterpart of the conviction of the  
Manchester school of economics that  supply and demand will regulate  everything for the best. 
Just as  economists were blind to the numerous cases in which the law of supply and  demand 
left actual wants unsatisfied, so also many ling uists are deaf to those instances in which the 
very nature of a language calls forth  misunderstandings in everyday  conversation, and in which, 
consequently, a word has to be modified or defined in order to present the idea  intended by the 
speaker: He took his  stickno, not John s, but his own . No language is perfect, and if we 
admit this truth, we must also admit that it  is not unreasonable to investigate the  relative merits 
of different languages  or of different details in languages.  
24. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) analyze an interesting feature of the English l anguage  
(B) refute a belief held by some linguists  
(C) show that economic theory is relevant to linguistic study  
(D) illustrate the confusion that can result from the improper use of language  
(E) suggest a way in which languages can be made more nearly perfect  
25. The misunderstanding presented by the author in lines 1 3-14 is similar to  which 504 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 of the following?  
I. X uses the word you to refer to  a group, but Y thinks that X is referring to  
one person only.  
II. X mistakenly uses the word  anomaly  to refer to a typical example, but Y  
knows  that anomaly  means exception.  
III. X uses the word bachelor  to mean unmarried man,  but Y mistakenly 
thinks that bachelor means unmarried woman.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) I and II only  
(E) II and III only  
26. In presenting the argument, the author does all of the following EXCEPT:  
(A) give an example  
(B) draw a conclusion  
(C) make a generalization  
(D) make a comparison  
(E) present a paradox  
27. Which of the following contributes t o the misunderstanding described by the  
author in lines 1 3-14? 
(A) It is unclear whom the speaker of the sentence is addressing.  
(B) It is unclear to whom the word his refers the first time it is used.  
(C) It is unclear to whom the word his refers the second time it is used.  
(D) The meaning of took is ambiguous.  
(E) It is unclear to whom He refers.  
SECTION B 
It is frequently assumed that the  mechanization of work has a  revolutionary effect on the 
lives of the  people who operate the new machines and on the society into which the machines  
have been introduced.  For example, it  has been suggested that the employment  of women in 
industry took them out of  the household, their traditional sphere, and fundamentally altered 
their position  in society. In the nineteenth century, when women began to  enter factories, Jule s 
Simon, a French politician, warned that by doing so, women would give up  their femininity. 
Friedrich Engels, however, predicted that women would be  liberated from the social, legal, and  
economic subordination  of the family by  technological developments  that made  possible the 
recruitment of the whole  female sex into public industry.  Observers thus differed concerning 
the social desirability of mechanization s effects, but they agreed that it would  transform  
women s lives.  
Historians, particularly those  investigating the history of women, now  seriously question  GRE  505 
 this assumption of transforming power. They conclude that  such dramatic technological 
innovations  as the spinning jenny , the sewing  machine, the typewriter, and the vacuum  cleaner 
have not resulted in equally  dramatic social changes in women s economic position or in the 
prevailing  evaluation of women s work. The  employment of young women in textile  mills during 
the Industrial Revolution was largely an extension of an older  pattern of employment of young, 
single  women as domestics . It was not the  change in office technology, but rather  the 
separation of secretarial work, previously seen  as an apprenticeship for  beginning managers, 
from administrative work that in the 1880 s created a new  class of dead-end jobs, thenceforth  
considered women s work.  The increase  in the numbers of married women employed outside 
the home in the twentieth  century had less to do with the  mechanization of housework and an  
increase in leisure time for these women  than it did with their own economic  necessity and with 
high marriage rates  that shrank the available pool of single  women workers, previously, in ma ny 
cases, the only women employers would  hire. 
Women s work has changed considerably in the past 200 years, moving from the 
household to the office or the factory, and later becoming mostly white -collar instead of 
blue-collar work. Fundamentally, however, the conditions  under which women work have 
changed little since before the Industrial  Revolution: the segregation of  occupations by gender, 
lower pay for  women as a group, jobs that require  relatively low levels of skill and offer  women 
little opportunity for advancement all persist, while women s household  labor remains 
demanding. Recent  historical investigation has led to a major revision of the notion that  
technology is always inherently  revolutionary in its effects on society. Mechanization may even 
have slowed any change in the traditional position of  women both in the labor market and in  
the home.  
17. Which of the following statements  best summarizes the main idea of the  passage?  
(A) The effects of the mechanization of women s work have not borne out t he 
frequently held assumption that new  technology is inherently revolutionary.  
(B) Recent studies have shown that  mechanization revolutionizes a society s 
traditional values and the customary  roles of its members.  
(C) Mechanization has caused the nature  of women s work to change since the  
Industrial Revolution.  
(D) The mechanization of work creates  whole new classes of jobs that did not  
previously exist.  
(E) The mechanization of women s work, while extremely revolutionary it its  
effects, has not, on the whole, had the  deleterious effects that some critics  
had feared.  
18. The author mentions all of the  following inventions as examples of  dramatic 
technological innovations EXCEPT the  
(A) sewing machine  
(B) vacuum cleaner  
(C) typewriter  
(D) telephone  506 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) spinning jenny  
19. It can be inferred from the passage  that, before the Industrial Revolution, the 
majority of women s work was done in  which of the following settings?  
(A) Textile mills  
(B) Private households  
(C) Offices  
(D) Factories  
(E) Small shops  
20. It can be inferred fro m the passage  that the author would consider which of  the 
following to be an indication of a  fundamental alteration in the conditions of 
women s work?  
(A) Statistics showing that the majority  of women now occupy white -collar  
positi ons 
(B) Interviews with married men  indicating that they are now doing some  
household tasks  
(C) Surveys of the labor market  documenting the recent creation of a new  class of 
jobs in electronics in which  women workers outnumber men four to one  
(D) Census re sults showing that working  women s wages and salaries are, on the  
average, as high as those of working men  
(E) Enrollment figures from universities  demonstrating that increasing numbers 
of young women are choosing to continue  their education beyond the 
undergraduate  level  
21. The passage states that, before the  twentieth century, which of the  following was 
true of many employers?  
(A) They did not employ women in  factories.  
(B) They tended to employ single rather  than married women.  
(C) They employed wome n in only those  jobs that were related to women s 
traditional household work.  
(D) They resisted technological  innovations that would radically change  women s 
roles in the family.  
(E) They hired women only when qualified  men were not available to fill the 
open  positions.  
22. It can be inferred from the passage  that the author most probably believes  which 
of the following to be true  concerning those historians who study  the histo ry of 
women?  
(A) Their work provides insights  important to those examining social  phenomena 
affecting the lives of both  sexes.  
(B) Their work can only be used  cautiously by scholars in other  disciplines.  
(C) Because they concentrate only on the  role of wom en in the workplace, they   GRE  507 
 draw more reliable conclusions than do other historians.  
(D) While highly interesting, their work  has not had an impact on most  historians  
current assumptions  concerning the revolutionary effect of  technology in the 
workplace.  
(E) They oppose the further mechanization of work, which, according to their  
findings, tends to perpetuate existing  inequalities in society.  
23. Which of the following best describes  the function of the concluding sentence  of 
the passage?  
(A) It sums u p the general points  concerning the mechanization of work  made in 
the passage as a whole.  
(B) It draws a conclusion concerning the  effects of the mechanization of work  
which goes beyond the evidence presented  in the passage as a whole.  
(C) It restates the point concerning  technology made in the sentence  immediately 
preceding it.  
(D) It qualifies the author s agreement  with scholars who argue for a major  
revision in the assessment of the impact  of mechanization on society.  
(E) It suggests a compromise between two  seemingly contradictory views 
concerning  the effects of mechanization on society.  
(This passage is excerpted from an article that was published in 1982.)  
Warm -blooded animals have elaborate  physiological control s to maintain  constant body 
temperature (in humans, 37 ). Why then during sickness  should temperature rise, apparently  
increasing stress on the infected  organism? It has long been known that  the level of serum iron 
in animals  falls during infection. Gariba ldi first suggested a relationship between  fever and iron. 
He found that  microbial synthesis of  siderophores substances that bind  ironin bacteria of the 
genus Salmonella  declined at environmental  temperatures above 37  and stopped at  40.3. 
Thus, fever would make it more  difficult for an infecting bacterium to acquire iron and thus to 
multiply. Cold -blooded animals were used to test  this hypothesis because their body 
temperature can be controlled in the  laboratory. Kluger reported that of iguanas infected with 
the potentially lethal bacterium A. hydrophilia , more  survived at temperatures of 42  than at 
37, even though healthy animals  prefer the lower temperature. When animals at 42  were 
injected with an  iron solution, however, mortalit y rates  increased significantly. Research to  
determine whether similar phenomena  occur in warm -blooded animals is sorely  needed.  
24. The passage is primarily concerned with  attempts to determine  
(A) the role of siderophores in the synthesis of serum iron  
(B) new treatments for infections that are caused by A. hydrophilia  
(C) the function of fever in warm -blooded  animals  
(D) the mechanisms that ensure constant body temperature  
(E) iron utilization in cold -blooded animals  
25. According to the passage, Garibaldi determined which of the following?  
(A) That serum iron is produced through microbial synthesis.  508 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) That microbial synthesis of siderophores  in warm -blooded animals is  more 
efficient  at higher temperatures.  
(C) That only iron bound to other substances  can be used by bacteria.  
(D) That there is a relationship between the synthesis of siderophores in bacteria 
of the genus Salmonella  and environmental temperature.  
(E) T hat bacteria of the genus Salmonella  require iron as a nutrient.  
26. Which of the following can be inferred about warm -blooded animals solely on 
the basis of information in the passage?  
(A) The body temperatures of warm -blooded animals cannot be easily con trolled 
in the laboratory.  
(B) Warm -blooded animals require more iron  in periods of stress than they do at  
other times.  
(C) Warm -blooded animals are more comfortable at an environmental 
temperature of 37  than they are at a temperature of 42 . 
(D) In warm -blooded animals, bacteria are responsible for the production of  
siderophores, which, in turn, make iron  available to the animal.  
(E) In warm -blooded animals, infections that lead to fever are usually traceable to 
bacteria.  
27. If it were to be determined that similar phenomena occur in warm -blooded 
animals  (lines 21-22), which of the following, assuming each is possible, is 
likely to  be the most effective treatment for warm -blooded animals with bacte rial 
infections?  
(A) Administering a medication that lowers the animals  body temperature  
(B) Injecting the animals with an iron solution  
(C) Administering a medication that makes serum iron unavailable to bacteria  
(D) Providing the animals with reduced -iron diets  
(E) Keeping the animals in an environment with temperatures higher than 37  
1991 02   
SECTION A  
As Gilbert White, Darwin, and others  observed long ago, all species appear to  have the 
innate capacity to increase  their numbers from generation  to generation. The task for ecologists 
is to untangle the environmental and  biological factors that hold this  intrinsic capacity for 
population growth  in check over the long run. The great variety of dynamic behaviors exhibited  
by different populations makes this task  more difficult: some populations remain  roughly 
constant from year to year ; others exhibit regular cycles of  abundance and scarcity; still others  
vary wildly, with outbreaks and crashes  that are in some cases plainly  correlated with the 
weather, and in other cases not.   GRE  509 
 To impose some order on this  kaleidoscope of patterns, on e school of  thought proposes 
dividing populations  into two groups. These ecologists posit  that the relatively steady 
populations  have density -dependent  growth  parameters; that is, rates of birth, death, and 
migration which depend  strongly on population d ensity. The  highly varying populations have  
density -independent  growth parameters, with vital rates buffeted by  environmental events; 
these rates  fluctuate in a way that is wholly  independent of population density.  
This dichotomy has its uses, but it  can cause problems if taken too  literally. For one thing, 
no population can be driven entirely by  density -independent factors all the  time. No matter how 
severely or  unpredictably birth, death and migration  rates may be fluctuating around their  
long-term aver ages, if there were no  density -dependent effects, the  population would, in the 
long run, either increase or decrease without  bound (barring a miracle by which gains  and 
losses canceled exactly). Put another way, it may be that on average  99 percent of all deaths in 
a population  arise from density -independent causes, and only one percent from factors  varying 
with density. The factors  making up the one percent may seem  unimportant, and their cause 
may be  correspondingly hard to determine. Yet, whether recogni zed or not, they will  usually 
determine the long -term average  population density.  
In order to understand the nature of  the ecologist s investigation, we may  think of the 
density -dependent effects  on growth parameters as the signal  ecologists are trying t o isolate 
and interpret, one that tends to make the  population increase from relatively low  values or 
decrease from relatively high  ones, while the density -independent  effects act to produce 
noise in the  population dynamics . For populations  that remain relatively constant, or that  
oscillate around repeated cycles, the signal can be fairly easily  characterized and its effects 
described, even though the causative biological  mechanism may remain unknown. For  
irregularly fluct uating populations, we  are likely to have too few observations to have any hope 
of extracting the  signal from the overwhelming noise. But  it now seems clear that all 
populations  are regulated by a mixture of  density -dependent and density -independent effect s 
in varying proportions.  
17. The author of the passage is  primarily concerned with  
(A) discussing two categories of factors  that control population growth and  
assessing their relative importance  
(B) describing how growth rates in  natural populations fluct uate over time  and 
explaining why these changes occur  
(C) proposing a hypothesis concerning  population sizes and suggesting ways to  
test it  
(D) posing a fundamental question about  environmental factors in population  
growth and presenting some currently  accepted answers  
(E) refuting a commonly accepted theory  about population density and offering a  
new alternative  
18. It can be inferred from the passage  that the author considers the dichotomy  
discussed in the second paragraph to be  
(A) applicable only to erratically  fluctuating populations  510 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) useful, but only if its limitations  are recognized  
(C) dangerously misleading in most  circumstances  
(D) a complete and sufficient way to  account for observed phenomena  
(E) conceptually valid, but too confusing  to apply on a pr actical basis  
19. Which of the following statements can  be inferred from the last paragraph?  
(A) For irregularly fluctuating  populations, doubling the number of  observations 
made will probably result  in the isolation of density -dependent  effects.  
(B) Densi ty-dependent effects on  population dynamics do not occur as  frequently 
as do density -independent  effects.  
(C) At present, ecologists do not  understand any of the underlying causes  of the 
density -dependent effects they  observe in population dynamics.  
(D) De nsity -dependent effects on growth  parameters are thought to be caused by  
some sort of biochemical signaling  that ecologists hope eventually to  
understand.  
(E) It is sometimes possible to infer the  existence of a density -dependent factor  
controlling po pulation growth without  understanding its causative 
mechanism.  
20. According to the passage, which of  the following is a true statement about  
density -dependent factors in population  growth?  
(A) They ultimately account for long -term population levels.  
(B) T hey have little to do with long -term population dynamics.  
(C) They are always more easily isolated  and described than those that are  
density -independent . 
(D) They include random environmental  events.  
(E) They contradict current ecological  assumptions about population dynamics.  
21. According to the passage, all of the  following behaviors have been exhibited  by 
different populations EXCEPT:  
(A) roughly constant population levels  from year to year  
(B) regular cycles of increases and  decreases in numbers  
(C) erratic increases in numbers  correlated with the weather  
(D) unchecked increases in numbers over  many generations  
(E) sudden declines in numbers from time  to time  
22. The discussion concerning po pulation  in lines 24-40 serves primarily to  
(A) demonstrate the difficulties  ecologists face in studying  density -dependent 
factors limiting population growth  
(B) advocate more rigorous study of  density -dependent factors in population  
growth  
(C) prove that the death rates of any  population are never entirely   GRE  511 
 density -independent  
(D) give an example of how death rates  function to limit population densities  in 
typical populations  
(E) underline the importance of even  small density -dependent factors in  
regulating long -term population  densities  
23. In the passage, the author does all  of the following EXCEPT:  
(A) cite the views of other biologists  
(B) define a basic problem that th e passage addresses  
(C) present conceptual categories used by  other biologists  
(D) describe the results of a particular study  
(E) draw a conclusion  
In Raisin in the Sun , Lorraine  Hansberry does not reject integration or  the economic and 
moral promise  of the American dream; rather, she remains  loyal to this dream while looking, 
realistically, at its incomplete  realization. Once we recognize this  dual vision, we can accept the 
plays ironic nuances as deliberate social  commentaries by Hansberry rather than  as the 
unintentional  irony that Bigsby  attributes to the work. Indeed a  curiously persistent refusal to 
credit  Hansberry with a capacity for  intentional irony has led some critics  to interpret the play s 
thematic  conflicts as mere confusion, contradicti on, or eclecticism. Isaacs, for example, cannot 
easily reconcile  Hansberry s intense concern for her race with her ideal of human reconciliation. 
But the play s complex view of Black  self-esteem and human solidarity as  compatible is no more 
contradictory  than Du Bois  famous, well -considered  ideal of ethnic self -awareness coexisting 
with human unity, or Fanon s emphasis on an ideal internationalism  that also accommodates 
national identities and roles.  
24. The author s primary purpose in this passage is to  
(A) explain some critics  refusal to consider Raisin  in the Sun  a deliberately ironic 
play 
(B) suggest that ironic nuances ally Raisin  in the Sun with Du Bois  and Fanon s 
writings  
(C) analyze the fundamental dramatic conflicts in Raisin in the Sun  
(D) ju stify the inclusion of contradictory elements in Raisin in the Sun  
(E) affirm the thematic coherence underlying Raisin  in the Sun  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the author believes which of the following 
about Hansberry s use of irony in Raisin in the Sun ? 
(A) It derives from Hansberry s eclectic approac h to dramatic structure.  
(B) It is justified by Hansberry s loyalty to a favorable depiction of American life.  
(C) It is influenced by the themes of works by Du Bois and Fanon.  
(D) It is more consistent with Hansberry s concern for Black Americans than wit h 
her ideal of human reconciliation.  
(E) It reflects Hansberry s reservations about the extent to which the American 512 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 dream has been realized.  
26. In which of the following does the author  of the passage reinforce his criticism of 
responses such as Isaacs  to Raisin in the Sun ? 
(A) The sta tement that Hansberry is loyal  (line 3) to the American dream  
(B) The description of Hansberry s concern for Black Americans as intense  
(line 13) 
(C) The assertion that Hansberry is concerned with human solidarity  (line 15)  
(D) The description of Du Bois ideal as well-considered  (line 17) 
(E) The description of Fanon s internationalism as ideal  (line 19) 
27. The author of the passage would probably  consider which of the following 
judgments  to be most similar to the reasoning of critics described in lines 8-12? 
(A) The world is certain ly flat; therefore, the person proposing to sail around it is 
unquestionably foolhardy.  
(B) Radioactivity cannot be directly perceived; therefore, a scientist could not 
possibly control it in a laboratory.  
(C) The painter of this picture could not intend i t to be funny, therefore, its humor 
must result from a lack of skill.  
(D) Traditional social mores are beneficial to culture; therefore, anyone who 
deviates from them acts destructively.  
(E) Filmmakers who produce documentaries deal exclusively with facts; therefore, 
a filmmaker who reinterprets particular events is misleading us.  
SECTION B 
Some recent historians have argued  that life in the British colonies in  America from 
approximate ly 1763 to 1789  was marked by internal conflicts among  colonists. Inheritors of 
some of the  viewpoints of early twentieth -century  Progressive historians such as Beard and 
Becker, these recent historians have put  forward arguments that deserve  evaluation.  
The kind of conflict most emphasized  by these historians is class conflict. Yet with the 
Revolutionary War dominating these years, how does one  distinguish class conflict within that  
larger conflict? Certainly not by the side a person supported. Although ma ny of these historians 
have accepted the  earlier assumption that Loyalists  represented an upper class, new evidence  
indicates that Loyalists, like rebels, were drawn from all socioeconomic  classes. (It is 
nonetheless probably  true that a larger percentage of the  well-to-do joined the Loyalists than  
joined the rebels.) Looking  at the rebel  side, we find little evidence for the  contention that 
lower -class rebels were  in conflict with upper -class rebels. Indeed, the war effort against Britain  
tended to suppres s class conflicts. Where it did not, the disputing rebels  of one or another class 
usually became  Loyalists. Loyalism thus operated as a  safety valve to remove socioeconomic  
discontent that existed among the  rebels. Disputes occurred, of course, among those  who 
remained on the rebel  side, but the extraordinary social mobility of eighteenth -century 
American  society (with the obvious exception of  slaves) usually prevented such disputes  from  GRE  513 
 hardening along class lines. Social structure was in fact so  fluidthough recent statistics 
suggest a  narrowing of economic opportunity as the latter half of the century  progressed that 
to talk about social  classes at all requires the use of loose economic categories such as rich, 
poor, and middle class, or eighteenth -centur y designations like the better sort.  Despite these 
vague categories, one  should not claim unequivocally that  hostility between recognizable 
classes  cannot be legitimately observed. Outside of New York, however, there were  very few 
instances of openly exp ressed  class antagonism.  
Having said this, however, one must  add that there is much evidence to  support the further 
claim of recent historians that sectional conflicts were  common between 1763 and 1789. The  
Paxton Boys  incident and the Regulator  movement  are representative examples of the 
widespread, and justified, discontent of western settlers against  colonial or state governments 
dominated  by eastern interests. Although  undertones of class conflict existed  beneath such 
hostility, the opposition  was pri marily geographical. Sectional  conflict which also existed 
between  North and South deserves further  investigation.  
In summary, historians must be careful  about the kind of conflict they  emphasize in 
eighteenth -century America. Yet those who stress the achi evement of  a general consensus 
among the colonists  cannot fully understand that consensus  without understanding the 
conflicts that  had to be overcome or repressed in order to reach it.  
17. The author considers the contentions  made by the recent historians discussed  in 
the passage to be  
(A) potentially verifiable  
(B) partially justified  
(C) logically contradictory  
(D) ingenious but flawed  
(E) capricious and unsupported  
18. The author most likely refers to  historians such as Beard and Becker  (lines 5-6) 
in order to  
(A) isolate the two historians whose work  is most representative of the viewpoints  
of Progressive historians  
(B) emphasize the need to find  connections between recent historical  writing and 
the work of earlier  historians  
(C) make a case for the  importance of the  views of the Progressive historians  
concerning eighteenth -century American  life 
(D) suggest that Progressive historians  were the first to discover the  particular 
internal conflicts in eighteenth -century American life  mentioned in the 
passage 
(E) point out historians whose views of  history anticipated some of the views of  
the recent historians mentioned in the  passage  
19. According to the passage, Loyalism  during the American Revolutionary War  
served the function of  514 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) eliminating the disputes that existed  among those colonists who supported the  
rebel cause  
(B) drawing upper, as opposed to lower, socioeconomic classes away from the  
rebel cause  
(C) tolerating the kinds of socioeconomic  discontent that were not allowed to  
exist on the reb el side  
(D) channeling conflict that existed  within a socioeconomic class into the  war 
effort against the rebel cause  
(E) absorbing members of socioeconomic  groups on the rebel side who felt  
themselves in contention with members of  other socioeconomic groups  
20. The passage suggests that the author  would be likely to agree with which of  the 
following statements about the social structure of eighteenth -century American 
society?  
I. It allowed greater economic opportunity than it did social mobility.  
II. It permitted greater economic  opportunity prior to 1750 than after  1750.  
III. It did not contain rigidly  defined socioe conomic divisions.  
IV . It prevented economic disputes  from arising among members of the  society.  
(A) I and IV only  
(B) II and III only  
(C) III and IV only  
(D) I, II, and III only  
(E) I, II, III, and IV  
21. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to agree 
with which of the following statements regarding socioeconomic class and 
support for the rebel and Loyalist causes during the American Revoluti onary 
War?  
(A) Identifying a person s socioeconomic  class is the least accurate method of  
ascertaining which side that person  supported.  
(B) Identifying a person as a member of  the rebel or of the Loyalist side does  not 
necessarily  reveal that person s particular socioeconomic class.  
(C) Both the rebel and the Loyalist sides contained members of all socioeconomic 
classes, although there were fewer disputes among socioeconomic classes on 
the Loyalist side.  
(D) Both the rebel and the Loyalist  sides contained members of all  socioeconomic 
classes, although  the Loyalist side was made up primarily of members of the 
upper  classes.  
(E) Both the rebel and the Loyalist  sides contained members of all  socioeconomic 
classes, although  many upper -class rebels eventually  joined the Loyalists.  
22. The author suggests which of the  following about the representativeness  of  GRE  515 
 colonial or state governments in  America from 1763 to 1789?  
(A) The governments inadequately  represented the interests of people in  western 
regions.  
(B) T he governments more often  represented class interests than  sectional 
interests.  
(C) The governments were less  representative than they had been before  1763.  
(D) The governments were dominated by the  interests of people of an upper  
socioeconomic class.  
(E) The governments of the northern  colonies were less representative than  were 
the governments of the southern  colonies.  
23. According to the passage, which of  the following is a true statement about  
sectional conflicts in America between  1763 and 178 9? 
(A) These conflicts were instigated by  eastern interests against western  settlers.  
(B) These conflicts were the most serious  kind of conflict in America.  
(C) The conflicts eventually led to  openly expressed class antagonism.  
(D) These conflicts containe d an element  of class hostility.  
(E) These conflicts were motivated by class conflicts.  
Since 1953, many experimental attempts to synthesize the chemical constituents of life 
under primitive Earth conditions  have been performed, but none  of these experiments has 
produced anything ap proaching the complexity  of the simplest organism. They have 
demonstrated, however, that a variety of  the complex molecules currently making  up living 
organisms could have been  present in the early ocean and atmosphere, with only on e limitation:  
such molecules are synthesized far less  readily when oxygen -containing  compounds dominate 
the atmosphere. Therefore some scientists postulate  that the Earth s earliest atmosphere, 
unlike that of today, was dominated by  hydrogen, methane, and ammonia.  
From these studies, scientists have  concluded that the surface of the  primitive Earth was 
covered with oceans  containing the molecules fundamental to  life. Although, at present, 
scientists  cannot explain how these relatively  small molecules combined to produce larger, 
more complex molecules, some  scientists have precipitously ventured  hypotheses that attempt 
to explain the  development, from lager molecu les, of  the earliest self -duplicating organisms.  
24. According to the passage, which of the following can be inferred about the 
process by which the chemical constituents of life were synthesized under 
primitive Earth conditions?  
(A) The synthesis is unlik ely to occur under current atmospheric conditions.  
(B) The synthesis is common in modern  laboratories.  
(C) The synthesis occurs more readily in the atmosphere than in the ocean.  
(D) The synthesis easily produces the most complex organic molecules.  
(E) T he synthesis is accelerated by the presence of oxygen -containing 
compounds.  516 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 25. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) point out that theories about how life developed on Earth have changed little  
since 1953  
(B) warn of increasing levels of hydrogen,  methane, and ammonia in the Earth s 
atmosphere  
(C) describe the development since 1953 of some scientists  understanding of 
how life began on Earth  
(D) demonstrate that the synthesis of life in the laboratory is too difficult for  
modern technology  
(E) describe how primitive atmospheric conditions produced the complex 
molecules of living organisms  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that some scientists  assume which of the 
following concerning larger, more complex molecules  (line 20)?  
(A) The earliest atmosphere was formed  primarily of these molecules.  
(B) Chemical processes involving these molecules proceeded much more slowly 
under primitive Earth conditions.  
(C) The presence of these molecules would necessarily precede the existence of  
simple organisms.  
(D) Experimental techniques will never be sufficiently sophisticated to produce  in 
the laboratory simple organisms from these chemical constituents.  
(E) Explanations could easily be developed to explain how simple molecules 
combined to form these more complex ones.  
27. The author s reaction to the attempts that have been made to explain the 
development of the first self -duplication organisms can be st be described as one 
of 
(A) enthusiasm  
(B) expectation  
(C) dismay  
(D) skepticism  
(E) antipathy  
1991 04   
SECTION A  
Isadora Duncan s masterly writings on the dance reveal the depth of her  determination to 
create a lyric form of the art which was free o f characterization, storytelling, and the theatrical 
exhibition of skills. She wished to discard the traditional methods and established vocabularies 
of such  dance forms as ballet and to explore the internal sources of human  expressiveness. She 
shunned bod ily ornamentation and strove to use only the  natural movements of her body,  GRE  517 
 undistorted by  acrobatic exaggeration and  stimulated only by internal compulsion. In her 
recitals Duncan danced to the  music of Beethoven, Wagner, and Gluck, among others, but, 
contrary to popular  belief, she made no attempt to visualize or to interpret the music; rather, 
she simply relied on it to provide the inspiration for expressing inner feelings  through 
movement. She did not regard this use of music as ideal, however, believin g that she would 
someday dispense with  music entirely. That day never came.  
17. The author is primarily concerned with Duncan s 
(A) masterful lyricism as expressed in her writings on the dance  
(B) concerted efforts to subdue the natural movements of the dance  
(C) belated recognition  that she could not actually fulfill all of her ideals for  the 
dance  
(D) basic standards for the dance form that she wished to create and perform  
(E) continuous responsiveness to a popular misconception about the nature of her  
new art form  
18. The autho r implies that Duncan relied on music in her recitals in order to  
(A) interpret musical works solely by means of natural body movements  
(B) foster the illusion that music serves as an inspiration for the dance  
(C) inspire the expression of inner feeling wh en she danced  
(D) validate the public belief that music inspires the expression of feeling  through 
movement  
(E) counter the public belief that she made no attempt to visualize music  
19. According to the passage, Duncan intended to develop an art form that would  do 
all of the following EXCEPT  
(A) avoid the use of standard ballet techniques  
(B) revitalize an e arlier established vocabulary  
(C) draw on internal sources of human expressiveness  
(D) create intended effects without the use of acrobatic exaggeration  
(E) derive inspiration solely from inner feelings  
20. It can be inferred from the passage that which  of the following endeavors is  
LEAST compatible with Duncan s ideals for the dance?  
(A) Using music to stimulate the inspiration to  dance  
(B) Attempting to free an art form of both characterization and storytelling  
(C) Minimizing the theatrical exhibition of skills  
(D) Being inspired to express inner feeling through movement  
(E) Creating a lyric art form by drawing on inner personal resources  
The recent, apparently successful , prediction by  mathematical models of an  appearance of 
El Ninothe warm ocean  current that periodically develops  along  the Pacific coast of South 
Americahas excited  researchers. Jacob Bjerknes  pointed out over 20 years  ago how winds  518 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 might create either abnormally warm or abnormally cold water in the eastern  equatorial Pacific. 
Nonetheless, until  the development of the models no one could explain why c onditions should  
regularly shift  from one to the other, as happens in the periodic oscillations  between 
appearances of the warm El Nino  and the cold so -called anti -El Nino. The answer, at least if  the 
current  model that links the behavior of the  ocean to t hat of the atmosphere is  correct, is to be 
found in the ocean.  
It has long been known that during an  El Nino, two  conditions exist: (1)  unusually warm 
water extends  along the  eastern Pacific, principally along the  coasts of  Ecuador and Peru, and 
(2) winds blow from the west  into the warmer  air rising over the warm water in the  east. These 
winds tend to create a feedback mechanism  by driving the warmer  surface water into a pile 
that blocks  the normal upwelling  of deeper, cold  water in  the east and further warms the  
eastern water, thus  strengthening the  wind still more. The contribution  of the model is to show 
that the winds of  an El Nino, which raise sea level in the  east, simultaneously send a signal to  
the west lowering sea level. According  to the model, that signal is generated  as a negative 
Rossby wave, a wave of  depressed, or negat ive, sea level, that moves westward parallel to the 
equator  at 25 to  85 kilometers per day. Taking  months to traverse the Pacific, Rossby  waves 
march to the western boundary of  the Pacific basin, which is modeled as a  smooth wall but in 
reality consists of  quite irregular island chains, such as the Philippines and Indonesia.  
When the waves meet the western  boundary, they are reflected, and the  model predicts 
that Rossby waves will be  broken into numerous coastal Kelvin  waves carrying the same 
negative  sea-level signal. These eventually  shoot toward the equator, and then head  eastward 
along the equator propelled by  the rotation of the Earth at a speed of  about 250 kilometers per 
day. When enough Kelvin waves of sufficient  amplitude arrive from the western Pac ific, their 
negative sea -level signal overcomes the feedback mechanism tending to raise the sea level, 
and they begin  to drive the system into the opposite  cold mode. This produces a gradual  shift in 
winds, one that will eventually  send positive sea -level Rossby waves  westward, waves that will 
eventually return as cold cycle -ending positive  Kelvin waves, beginning another warming  cycle.  
21. The primary function of the passage  as a whole is to  
(A) introduce a new explanation of a  physical phenomenon  
(B) expl ain the difference between two  related physical phenomena  
(C) illustrate the limitations of  applying mathematics to complicated  physical 
phenomena  
(D) indicate the direction that research  into a particular physical phenomenon  
should take  
(E) clarify the  differences between an  old explanation of a physical phenomenon  
and a new model of it  
22. Which of the following best describes  the organization of the first paragraph?  
(A) A theory is presented and criticized.  
(B) A model is described and evaluated.  
(C) A result is reported and its  importance explained.  
(D) A phenomenon is noted and its  significance debated.   GRE  519 
 (E) A hypothesis is introduced and  contrary evidence presented.  
23. According to t he passage, which of  the following features is characteristic  of an 
El Nino?  
(A) Cold coastal water near Peru  
(B) Winds blowing from the west  
(C) Random occurrence  
(D) Wo rldwide effects  
(E) Short duration  
24. According to the model presented in the passage, which of the following 
normally signals the disappearance of an El Nino?  
(A) The arrival in the eastern Pacific of  negative sea -level Kelvin waves.  
(B) A shift in th e direction of the winds  produced by the start of an anti -El Nino  
elsewhere in  the Pacific.  
(C) The reflection of Kelvin waves after  they reach the eastern boundary of the  
Pacific, along Ecuador and Peru.  
(D) An increase in the speed at which  negative Ross by waves cross the Pacific.  
(E) The creation of a reservoir of  colder, deep ocean water trapped under  the pile 
of warmer, surface ocean water.  
25. It can be inferred from the passage  that which of the following would result  fairly 
immediately from the cessation of  the winds of an  El Nino?  
I. Negative Rossby waves would cease to be generated in the eastern Pacific.  
II. The sea level in the eastern  Pacific would fall.  
III. The surface water in the eastern  Pacific would again be cooled by being  
mixed with deep water.  
(A) I only  
(B) I I only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) I and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
26. Which of the following, if true, would most seriously undermine the  validity of 
the model of El Nino that is  presented in the passage?  
(A) During some years El Nino extends  significantly farther along the coasts  of 
Ecuador and Pe ru than during other  years.  
(B) During periods of unusually cool  temperatures along the eastern Pacific, an El 
Nino is much colder than normal.  
(C) The normal upwelling of cold water in  the eastern Pacific depends much 
more on  the local characteristics of the ocean  than on atmospheric 
conditions.  520 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) The variations in the time it takes  Rossby waves to cross the Pacific depend  
on the power of the winds that the waves  encounter.  
(E) The western boundary of the Pacific  basin is so irregular that it impedes  most 
coastal Kelvin waves from heading  eastward.  
27. The passage best supports the  conclusion that during an anti -El Nino  the 
fastest -moving signal waves are  
(A) negative Ros sby waves moving east  along the equator  
(B) positive Rossby waves moving west  along the equator  
(C) negative Kelvin waves moving west  along the equator  
(D) positive Kelvin waves moving west  along the equator  
(E) positive Kelvin waves moving east  along t he equator  
SECTION B 
Historians have only recently begun to  note the increase in demand for luxury  goods and 
services that took place in  eighteenth -century England. McKendrick has explored the 
Wedgwood firm s remarkable success in marketing luxury  pottery;  Plumb has written about the  
proliferation of provincial theaters, musical festivals, and children s toys  and books. While the 
fact of this consumer revolution is hardly in doubt, three key questions remain: Who were the  
consumers? What were their motives?  And what were the effects of the new demand  for 
luxuries?  
An answer to the first of these has  been difficult to obtain. Although it  has been possible to 
infer from the goods and services actually produced  what manufactures and servicing trades  
thought the ir customers wanted, only a  study of relevant personal documents written by actual 
consumers will provide  a precise picture of who wanted what. We  still need to know how large 
this consumer market was and how far down the social scale the consumer demand f or luxury 
goods penetrated. With regard to this last question, we might note in  passing that Thompson, 
while rightly  restoring laboring people to the stage  of eighteenth -century English history, has 
probably exaggerated the opposition of these people to th e inroads of  capitalist consumerism in 
general; for  example, laboring people in  eighteenth -century England readily  shifted from 
home -brewed beer to  standardized beer produced by huge, heavily capitalized urban 
breweries.  
To answer the question of why  consu mers became so eager to buy, some historians have 
pointed to the ability of manufacturers to advertise in a relatively uncensored press. This, 
however, hardly seems a sufficient answer. McKendrick favors a Veblen model of conspicuous 
consumption  stimulated by competition for status. The middling sort  bought goods and 
services because they wanted to follow fashions set by the rich. Again, we may wonder whether 
this explanation is  sufficient. Do not people enjoy buying  things as a form of self -gratification? If 
so, consumerism could be seen as a  product of the rise of new concepts of  individualism and 
materialism , but not  necessari ly of the frenzy for  conspicuous competition.  
Finally, what were the consequences of  this consumer demand for luxuries?  McKendrick 
claims that it goes a long  way toward explaining the coming of the  Industrial Revolutio n. But  GRE  521 
 does it?  What, for example, does the production  of high -quality pottery and toys have to  do 
with the development of iron  manufacture or textile mills? It is  perfectly possible to have the  
psychology and reality of a consumer  society without a heavy industrial sector.  
That future exploration of these key  questions is undoubtedly necessary  should not, 
however, diminish the force  of the conclusion of recent studies: the  insatiable demand in 
eighteenth -century  England for frivolous as well as useful  goods and services foreshadows our 
own world.  
17. In the first paragraph, the author  mentions McKendrick and Plumb most  probably 
in order to  
(A) contrast their views on the subject  of luxury consumerism in  
eighteenth -century England  
(B) indicate the inadequacy  of historiographical approaches to  eighteenth -century 
English history  
(C) give examples of historians who have  helped to establish the fact of growing  
consumerism in eighteenth -century  England  
(D) support the contention that key  questions about eighteenth -century  
consumerism remain to be answered  
(E) compare one historian s interest in  luxury goods such as pottery to another  
historian s interest in luxury services  such as musical festivals  
18. Which of the following items, if  preserved from eighteenth -century  England, 
would provide an example of the  kind of documents mentioned in lines  16-17? 
(A) A written agreement between a  supplier of raw materials and a supplier  of 
luxury goods  
(B) A diary that mentions luxury goods  and services purchased by its auth or 
(C) A theater ticket stamped with the  date and name of a particular play  
(D) A payroll record from a company that  produced luxury goods such as pottery  
(E) A newspaper advertisement describing  luxury goods and services available at 
a seaside resort  
19. According to the passage, Thompson  attributes to laboring people in  
eighteenth -century England which of the  following attitudes toward capitalist 
consu merism?  
(A) Enthusiasm  
(B) Curiosity  
(C) Ambivalence  
(D) Stubbornness  
(E) Hostility  
20. In the third paragraph, the author  is primarily concerned with  
(A) contrasting two theses and offering  a compromise  
(B) questioning two explanations and  proposing a possible alternative to  them  522 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) paraphrasing the work of two  historians and questioning their  assumptions  
(D) examining two theories and endorsing  one over the other  
(E) raising several questions but  implying that they cannot be answered  
21. According to the passage, a Veblen  model of conspicuous consumption has  been 
used to  
(A) investigate the extent of the demand  for luxury goods among social classes in  
eighteenth -century England  
(B) classify the kinds of luxury goods  desired by eighteenth -century con sumers  
(C) explain the motivation of  eighteenth -century consumers to buy  luxury goods  
(D) establish the extent to which the  tastes of rich consumers were shaped by  the 
middle classes in eighteenth -century  England  
(E) compare luxury consumerism in  eighteenth -century England with such  
consumerism in the twentieth century  
22. According to the passage, eighteenth -century England and the  contemporary 
world of the passage s readers are  
(A) dissimilar in the extent to  which  luxury consumerism could be said to be  
widespread among the social classes  
(B) dissimilar in their definitions of  luxury goods and services  
(C) dissimilar in the extent to which  luxury goods could be said to be a  stimulant 
of industrial development  
(D) similar in their strong demand for a  variety of goods and services  
(E) similar in the extent to which a  middle class could be identified as  imitating 
the habits of a wealthier  class  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would most probably agree 
with which of the following statements about the relati onship between the 
Industrial Revolution and the demand for luxury goods and services in 
eighteenth -century England?  
(A) The growing demand for luxury goods  and services was a major factor in the  
coming of the Industrial Revolution.  
(B) The Industrial Revo lution exploited  the already existing demand for luxury  
goods and services.  
(C) Although the demand for luxury goods  may have helped bring about the  
Industrial Revolution, the demand for  luxury services did not.  
(D) There is no reason to believe that  the Industrial Revolution was directly  
driven by a growing demand for luxury  goods and services.  
(E) The increasing demand for luxury  goods and services was a cultural  
phenomenon that has been conclusively demonstrated to have been separate 
from the coming o f the Industrial Revolution.  
Researchers are finding that in many  ways an individual bacterium is more  analogous to a  GRE  523 
 component cell of a  multicellular organism than it is to a  free-living, autonomous organism. 
Anabaena , a freshwater bacteria , is a case in  point. Among photosynthetic  bacteria, Anabaena  
is unusual: it is  capable of both photosynthesis and  nitrogen fixation. Within a single  cell, these 
two biochemical processes  are incompatible: oxygen produced during  photosynthesis, 
inactivates the  nitrogena se required for nitrogen  fixation. In Anabaena  communities, however, 
these processes can coexist. When fixed nitrogen compounds are  abundant, Anabaena  is 
strictly  photosynthetic and its cells are all alike. When nitrogen levels are  low, however, 
specialized cells called  heterocysts  are produced which lack  chlorophyll (necessary for  
photosynthesis) but which can fix nitrogen by converting nitrogen gas into  a usable form. 
Submicroscopic channels  develop which con nect the heterocyst  cells with the photosynthetic 
ones and  which are used for transferring cellular  products between the two kinds of  Anabaena  
cells. 
24. According to the passage, which of  the following statements is true of  bacteria 
that engage in photosy nthesis?  
(A) They eventually become two  autonomous cells.  
(B) They cannot normally also engage in  nitrogen fixation.  
(C) Oxygen normally inactivates them.  
(D) Cellular products are constantly  transferred between such bacteria.  
(E) They normally lack chlorophyll.  
25. It can be inferred from the passage  that cell differentiation within  Anabaena  is 
regulated by the  
(A) amount of oxygen Anabaena  cells produce  
(B) season of the year  
(C) amount of fixed nitrogen compounds availabl e 
(D) number of microscopic channels  uniting Anabaena  cells 
(E) amount of chlorophyll in Anabaena  cells 
26. The passage supports which of the  following inferences about heterocysts?  
(A) Heterocysts do not produce oxygen.  
(B) Nitrogen gas inactivates het erocysts.  
(C) Chlorophyll increases the  productivity of heterocysts.  
(D) Heterocysts allow nitrogen fixation  and photosynthesis to occur in the same  
cell. 
(E) Heterocysts are more important for  Anabaena s functioning than are  
photosynthetic cells.  
27. The author uses the example of  Anabaena  to illustrate the  
(A) uniqueness of bacteria among  unicellular organisms  
(B) inadequacy of an existing view of  bacteria  
(C) ability of unicellular organisms to  engage in photosynthesis  
(D) variability of a freshwater bacteria  524 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) difficulty of investigating even the  simplest unicellular organisms  
1991 10   
SECTION A  
Aided by the recent ability to analyze samples of air trapped in glaciers, scientists now have 
a clearer idea of the relationship between atmospheric composition and global temperature 
change over the past 160,000 years. In particular, determination of atmospheric comp osition 
during periods of glacial expansion and  retreat  (cooling and warming) is possible using data 
from the 2,000 meter Vostok ice core drilled in Antarctic a. The technique involved is similar to 
that used in analyzing  cores  of marine sediments, where th e ratio of the two common isotopes 
of oxygen, 18O and 16O, accurately reflects past  temperature changes. Isotopic analysis of 
oxygen in the Vostok core suggests mean global temperature fluctuations of up to 10 degrees 
centigrade over the past 160,000 years . 
Data from the Vostok core also indicate  that the amount of carbon dioxide has fluctuated 
with temperature over the same period: the higher the temperature, the higher the 
concentration of carbon dioxide and the lower the temperature, the lower the  concen tration. 
Although change in carbon dioxide content closely follows change in temperature during  
periods  of degla ciation , it apparently lags behind temperature during periods of cooling. The 
correlation of carbon dioxide with temperature, of course, does no t establish  whether changes 
in atmospheric composition caused the warming and cooling trends or were caused by their.  
The correlation  between carbon dioxide and temperature throughout the Vostok record is 
consistent and predictable. The absolute temperatur e changes, however, are from 5 to 14 times 
greater than would be expected on the basis of carbon dioxide s own ability to absorb infrared 
radiation, or radiant heat. This reaction  suggests that, quite aside from  changes in 
heat-trapping  gases, commonly known as greenhouse gases, certain positive feedbacks are 
also amplifying the temperature change. Such feedbacks might involve ice on land and sea, 
clouds, or water vapor, which also absorb radiant heat . 
Other  data from the Vostok core show that methane gas also correlates closely with 
temperature and carbon dioxide. The methane concentration nearly doubled , for example, 
between the peak of the penultimate glacial period and the following interglacial period. W ithin 
the present interglacial period it has more than doubled  in just the past 300 years and is rising 
rapidly. Although the concentration of atmospheric methane is more than two orders of 
magnitude lower than that of carbon dioxide, it cannot be ignored:  the radiative properties of 
methane make it 20 times more effective, molecule  for molecule, than carbon dioxide in 
absorbing radiant heat. On the basis of a simulation model that climatological researchers have 
developed, methane appears to have been abou t 25 percent as important as carbon dioxide in 
the warming that took place during the most recent glacial retreat 8,000 to 10,000 years ago.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) interpret data  
(B) explain research methodology   GRE  525 
 (C) evaluate a con clusion  
(D) suggest a new technique  
(E) attack a theory  
18. According to the passage, which of the following statements about methane is 
true?  
(A) Methane is found in marine sediments.  
(B) Methane is more effective than carbon dioxide in absorbing radia nt heat.  
(C) The Earth s atmosphere now contains more than twice as much methane as it 
does carbon dioxide.  
(D) The higher the concentration of carbon dioxide in the Earth s atmosphere, the 
lower the concentration of methane.  
(E) Most of the global warm ing that has occurred during the past 10 years has 
been associated with increased methane concentration.  
19. According to the passage, which of the following statements best describes the 
relationship between carbon dioxide and global temperature?  
(A) Carb on dioxide levels change immediately in response to changes in 
temperature.  
(B) Carbon dioxide levels correlate with global temperature during cooling 
periods only.  
(C) Once carbon dioxide levels increase, they remain high regardless of changes 
in global t emperature.  
(D) Carbon dioxide levels increase more quickly than global temperature does.  
(E) During cooling periods, carbon dioxide levels initially remain high and then 
decline.  
20. The author mentions certain positive feedbacks  (lines 35-36) in ord er to 
indicate that  
(A) increased concentration of carbon dioxide in the Earth s atmosphere is 
responsible for global temperature increase  
(B) some climate simulation models have produced useful information  
(C) greenhouse gases alone do not account for glo bal temperature increase  
(D) variables that benefit life are causing global temperature to increase  
(E) beneficial substances that are not heat -trapping gases and that contribute to 
global temperature increase have been found in the V ostok ice core  
21. It can be inferred from the passage that a long -term decrease in the concentration 
of carbon dioxid e in the Earth s atmosphere would  
(A) increase methane  concentration in the Earth s atmosphere  
(B) accompany a period of glaciation  
(C) encourage the formation of more oxygen isotopes in the Earth s atmosphere  526 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) promote the formation of more water in the  Earth s global environment  
(E) increase the amount of infrared radiation absorbed by the Earth s atmosphere  
22. The passage suggests that when the methane concentration in the Earth s 
atmosphere decreases, which of the following also happens?  
(A) Glaciers melt faster.  
(B) The co ncentration of carbon dioxide increases.  
(C) The mean global temperature decreases.  
(D) Carbon dioxide absorbs more radiant beat.  
(E) More clouds form in the Earth s atmosphere . 
23. In the fourth paragraph, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) res tating the main idea of the passage  
(B) using research findings to develop a simulation model  
(C) outlining the direction of future reserves  
(D) providing an additional example of a phenomenon  
(E) introducing a conflicting hypothesis  
In The Women of Mex ico City, 1796 -1857, Sylvia Marina Arrom argues that the status of 
women in Mexico City improved during the nineteenth century. According to Arrom, households 
headed by females and instances of women working outside the home were much more 
common than scho lars have estimated; efforts by the Mexican government to encourage 
female education resulted in increased female literacy; and influential male writers wrote pieces  
advocating education, employment, and increased family responsibilities for women, while 
deploring womens political and marital inequality. Mention of the fact that the civil codes of 
1870 and 1884 significantly advanced womens rights would have further strengthened Arroms 
argument.  
Arrom does not discuss whether womens improved status counteracted the effects on 
women of instability in the Mexican economy during the nineteenth century. However, this is 
not so much a weakness in her w ork as it is the inevitable result of scholars neglect of this 
period. Indeed, such gaps in Mexican history are precisely what make Arroms pioneering study 
an important addition to Latin American womens history.  
24. The passage is primarily concerned wi th doing which of the following?  
(A) Reviewing a historical study of the status of women in Mexico City during 
the nineteenth century  
(B) Analyzing the effects of economic instability on the status of women in 
Mexico during the nineteenth century  
(C) Advan cing a thesis explaining why womens status in Mexico City improved 
during the nineteenth century  
(D) Rejecting the thesis that the status of women in Mexico City during the 
nineteenth century actually improved  
(E) Praising an author for a pioneering at tempt to bridge significant gaps in  GRE  527 
 Mexicos economic history prior to 1790  
25. According to the author of the passage, Arroms study can be characterized as an 
important addition to Latin American womens history (lines 21 -22) because it  
(A) offers a ra dical thesis concerning the status of womens civil rights in 
Mexican society during the nineteenth century  
(B) relies on a new method of historical analysis that has not previously been 
applied to Latin American history  
(C) focuses only on the status of w omen in Mexican society  
(D) addresses a period in Mexican history that scholars have to some extent  
neglected  
(E) is the first study to recognize the role of the Mexican government in 
encouraging womens education  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that Arrom would agree with which of the 
following assertions?  
(A) Efforts by the Mexican government to encourage education for women 
during the nineteenth century were hampered by the economic instability of 
that period.  
(B) The most significant advances in the rights of Mexican women during the 
nineteenth century occurred prior to 1857.  
(C) Improvements in the status of women in Mexico City during the nineteenth 
century were accompanied by similar improvements in the stat us of women 
in other large Latin American cities.  
(D) Scholars have in the past accorded the most significance to 
nineteenth -century Mexican literature that supported the status quo in 
womens political and marital rights.  
(E) Scholars have in the past underestimated the number of households headed by 
females in Mexico City.  
27. Which of the following best describes the authors attitude toward Arroms work?  
(A) Uncritical approval  
(B) Enthusiasm tempered by minor reservations  
(C) Praise for her thesis, despite skepticism regarding the sources of her evidence  
(D) Reluctant acceptance, despite lingering doubts regarding the accuracy of her 
thesis  
(E) Rejection, despite admiration for her attempt to break new ground in a 
hitherto neglected field  
SECTION B 
Present -day philosophers usually envision their discipline as an endeavor  that has been, 
since antiquity, distinct from and superior to any particular intellectual discipline, such as 528 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 theology or science. Such philosoph ical concerns as the mind -body problem or, more generally, 
the nature of human knowledge, they believe, are basi c human questions whose tentative 
philosophical solutions have served as the necessary foundations on which all other intellectual 
speculation  has rested.  
The basis for this view, however, lies in a serious misinterpretation of the past, a projection 
of modern concerns onto past events. The idea of an autonomous discipline called philosophy, 
distinct from and sitting in judgment on such pursuits as theology and science turns out, on 
close examination, to be of quite recent origin. When, in the seventeenth century, Descartes 
and Hobbes rejected medieval philosophy, they did not think of themselves, as modern 
philosophers do, as proposing a  new and better philosophy, but rather as furthering the 
warfare between science and theology. They were fighting, albeit discreetly, to open the 
intellectual world to the new science and to liberate intellectual life from ecclesiastical 
philosophy and e nvisioned their work as contributing to the growth, not of philosophy, but of 
research in mathematics and physics. This link between philosophical interests and scientific 
practice persisted until the nineteenth century, when decline in ecclesiastical powe r over 
scholarship and changes in the nature of science provoked the final separation of philosophy 
from both.  
The demarcation of philosophy from science was facilitated by the development in the 
early nineteenth century of a new notion, that philosophys core interest should be 
epistemology, the general explanation of what it means to know something. Modern 
philosophers now trace that notion back at least to Descartes and Spinoza, but it was not 
explicitly articulated until the late eighteenth century, by Kant, and did not become built into the 
structure of academic institutions and the standard self -descriptions of philosophy professors 
until the late nineteenth century. Without the idea of epistemology, the survival of philosophy in 
an age of modern scien ce is hard to imagine. Metaphysics, philosophys traditional 
coreconsidered as the most general description of how the heavens and the earth are put 
together had been rendered almost completely meaningless by the spectacular progress of 
physics. Kant, how ever, by focusing philosophy on the problem of knowledge, managed to 
replace metaphysics with epistemology, and thus to transform the notion of philosophy as 
queen of sciences into the new notion of philosophy as a separate, foundational discipline. 
Philosophy  became primary no longer in the sense of highest but in the sense of 
underlying. After Kant, philosophers were able to reinterpret seventeenth -and 
eighteenth -century thinkers as attempting to discover How is our knowledge possible? and to 
project this question back even on the ancients.  
17. Which of the following best expresses the authors main point?  
(A) Philosophys overriding interest in basic human questions is a legacy 
primarily of the work of Kant.  
(B) Philosophy was deeply involved in  the seventeenth -century warfare between 
science and religion.  
(C) The set of problems of primary importance to philosophers has remained 
relatively constant since antiquity.  
(D) The status of philosophy as an independent intellectual pursuit is a relative ly 
recent development.   GRE  529 
 (E) The role of philosophy in guiding intellectual speculation has gradually been 
usurped by science.  
18. According to the passage, present -day philosophers believe that the mind -body 
problem is an issue that  
(A) has implications primarily for philosop hers 
(B) may be affected by recent advances in science  
(C) has shaped recent work in epistemology  
(D) has little relevance to present -day philosophy  
(E) has served as a basis for intellectual speculation since antiquity  
19. According to the author, phil osophy became distinct from science and theology 
during the  
(A) ancient period  
(B) medieval period  
(C) seventeenth century  
(D) nineteenth century  
(E) twentieth century  
20. The author suggests that Descartes support for the new science of the 
seventeent h century can be characterized as  
(A) pragmatic and hypocritical  
(B) cautious and inconsistent  
(C) daring and opportunistic  
(D) intense but fleeting  
(E) strong but prudent  
21. The author of the passage implies which of the following in discussing the 
development of philosophy during the nineteenth century?  
(A) Nineteenth -century philosophy took science as its model for understanding 
the bases of knowledge.  
(B) The role of academic institutions in shaping metaphysical philosophy grew 
enormously during  the nineteenth century.  
(C) Nineteenth -century philosophers carried out a program of investigation 
explicitly laid out by Descartes and Spinoza.  
(D) Kant had an overwhelming impact on the direction  of nineteenth -century 
philosophy.  
(E) Nineteenth -century philosophy made major advances in understanding the 
nature of knowledge.  
22. With which of the following statements concerning the writing of history would 
the author of the passage be most likely to agree?  
(A) History should not  emphasize the role played by ideas over the role played by 530 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 individuals.  
(B) History should not be distorted by attributing present -day consciousness to 
historical figures.  
(C) History should not be focused primarily on those past events most relevant  to 
the present.  
(D) History should be concerned with describing those aspects of the past that 
differ most from those of the present.  
(E) History should be examined for the lessons it can provide in understanding 
current problems.  
23. The primary function of the passage as a whole is to  
(A) compare two competing models  
(B) analyze a difficult theory  
(C) present new evidence for a the ory 
(D) correct an erroneous belief by describing its origins  
(E) resolve a long -standing theoretical controversy  
Biologists have long maintained that two groups of pinnipeds , sea lions and walruses, are 
descended  from a terrestrial  bearlike animal, whereas the remaining group, seals, shares an 
ancestor with weasels . But the recent discovery of detailed similarities in the skeletal structure 
of the flippers in all three groups undermines the attempt to explain away  superficial  
resemblance as due to convergent evolution the independent development of similarities 
between unrelated groups in response to similar environmental pressures . Flippers may indeed 
be a necessary response to aquatic life ; turtles, whales, and dugongs  also have them. But the 
common detailed design found among the pinnipeds probably indicates a c ommon ancestor. 
Moreover, walruses and seals drive themselves through the water with thrusts of their hind 
flippers, but sea lions use their front flippers. If anatomical similarity in the flippers resulted 
from similar environmental pressures, as posited by the convergent  evolution theory, one would 
expect walruses and seals, but not seals and sea lions, to have similar flippers.  
24. According to the passage, it has been recently discovered that  
(A) there are detailed skeletal similarities in the flippers of pinnipeds  
(B) sea lions, seals, and walruses are all pinnipeds  
(C) pinnipeds are descended from animals that once lived on land  
(D) animals without common ancestors sometimes evolve in similar ways  
(E) animals that have flippers do not all use them in the same way  
25. The author implies that which of the following was part of the long -standing view 
concerning pinnipeds?  
(A) Pinnipeds are all descended from a terrestrial bearlike animal.  
(B) Pinni peds share a common ancestor  with turtles, whales, and dugongs.  
(C) Similarities among pinnipeds are due to their all having had to adapt to 
aquatic life.   GRE  531 
 (D) There are detailed similar ities in the skeletal structure of the flippers in all 
pinnipeds.  
(E) Convergent evolution cannot account for the similar ities among pinnipeds.  
26. The author implies which of the following about the fact that turtles, whales, and 
dugongs all have flippers?  
(A) It can be explained by the hypothesis that turtles, whales, an d dugongs are 
very closely related.  
(B) It can be explained by the idea of convergent evolution.  
(C) It suggests that turtles, whales, and dugongs evolved in separate parts of the 
world.  
(D) It undermines the view that turtles, whales, and dugongs are all descended 
from terrestrial ancestors.  
(E) It is the primary difference between turtles, whales, and dugongs, on the one 
hand, and pinnipeds, on the other.  
27. In presenting the argument in the passage, the author does which of the 
following?  
(A) Contend s that key terms in an opposing view have been improperly used.  
(B) Contends that opponents have purposely obscured important evidence.  
(C) Shows that two theories thought to be in conflict are actually complementary.  
(D) Shows that advocates of a theory h ave not always stated their view in the 
same manner.  
(E) Shows that an implication of a theory is contradicted by the facts.  
1992 02   
SECTION A  
The more that is discovered about the intricate organization of the nervous system, the 
more it seems remarkable that genes can successfully specify the develop ment of that system. 
Human genes contain too little information even to specify which hemisphere of the brain each 
of a human s 1011 neurons should occupy, let alone the hundreds of connections that each 
neuron makes. For such reasons, we can assume that t here must be an important random 
factor in neural development, and in particular, that errors must and do occur in the 
development of all normal brains.  
The most vivid expression of such errors occurs in genetically identical (isogenic) 
organisms. Even whe n reared under the same conditions, isogenic organisms are rarely exact 
copies of one another, and their differences have revealed much about the random variations 
that result from  an organism s limited supply of genetic information . In isogenic Daphniae, for 
example, even though the position, size, and branching pattern of each optic neuron are 
remarkably constant, there is some variability in connectivity, and the number of synapses 
varies greatly. This variability is probably the result of random scatter beyond the resolution of 532 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 genetic control and is best termed imprecision,  since its converse, the degree of clustering 
about a mean, is conventionally, called precision.  
Imprecision should be distinguished from developmental mis takes: wrongly migrated 
neurons, incorrect connections, and the like. To use a computer analogy, minor rounding -off 
errors occur universally and are analogous to imprecision, but occasionally a binary digit is 
incorrectly transmitted, perhaps ruining a cal culation, and this incorrect transmission is 
analogous to a developmental mistake. Thus, imprecision is a form of inaccuracy inherent 
within the limits of design, but mistakes are forms of gross fallibility.  
Both impre cision and gross fallibility can plaus ibly be blamed on the insufficiency of genetic 
information, since either could be reduced by adding more information. It is universally 
accepted among information theorists that codes and languages can be made mistake -resistant 
by incorporating redundancy.  However, since the amount of space available in any information 
system is limited, increased redundancy results in decreased precision. For example,  when 
written incorrectly in English, three point oen four two, can be understood correctly even 
though a typographical error has occurred. More precision could be gained, however, if those 24 
spaces were filled with Arabic numerals ; then  could be expressed to  23 significant digits , 
although any error would significantly change the meaning. There exists a trade-off, the more 
precisely a system is specified, using a given limited amount of in formation, the greater the 
danger of gross mistakes. The overall scheme by which genetic information is rationed out  in 
organisms, therefore, must involve a compromise between two conflicting prior ities: precision 
and the avoidance of gross mistakes.  
17. Which of the following best expresses  the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Although studies of isogenic  organism s have shown that all organisms  are 
subject to developmental variations, there is still scientific debate over  the 
exact causes of these variations.  
(B) Because of limitations on the amount  of information contained in the genes of  
organisms, developing ner vous systems  are subject to two basic kinds of 
error, the likelihood of one of which is  reduced only when the likelihood of 
the other is increased.  
(C) The complexity of an organism s genetic information means that much of  the 
unusual variation that occurs  among  organisms  can best be explained as the 
result  of developmental mistakes.  
(D) New findings about the nature of the  genetic control of neural development  
support the work of some scientists who  argue that the computer is an 
extremely  useful model for understanding the  nervous system.  
(E) The major discovery made by  scientists studying the genetic control  of neural 
development is that both  imprecision and gross developmental  error can be 
traced to specific types of  mutations in specific genes.  
18. According to the passage, one of th e reasons it has been assumed that there  is an 
important random element in human  neural development is that  
(A) genes cannot specify certain types of  developmental processes as we ll as they  
can others   GRE  533 
 (B) the intricacy of the nervous system  allows small de velopmental errors to  
occur without harmful effects  
(C) the amount of information contained  in the genes is less than the amount  
necessary to specify the location of the  neurons  
(D) the number of neurons in the human  brain varies greatly from individual to  
individual  
(E) it is theoretically impossible for an  organism to protect itself completely  from 
gross developmental mistakes  
19. The author suggests which of the  following about the findings of  information 
theorists?  
(A) Their findings provocatively  challenge the standard explanation of  
redundancy in genes.  
(B) Their findings provide useful  insights into understanding the  rationing of 
genetic information.  
(C) Their findings help to explain why  imprecision can occur in neural  
development but not why gros s mistakes  can occur.  
(D) Their findings suggest that genes may  be able to specify neural development  
more accurately than had previously been  thought.  
(E) Their findings support the work of  those who use computer operations as  
models for understanding genetic  control.  
20. According to the passage, of the  following aspects of the optic neurons  of 
isogenic Daphniae, which varies the  most?  
(A) Size  
(B) Connectivity  
(C) Position  
(D) Branching pattern  
(E) Number of synapses  
21. Which of the following best describes  the organization of the first paragraph?  
(A) A specific case is presented, its  details are analyzed, and a conclusion  is 
drawn from it.  
(B) A discovery is announced, its most  significant application is discussed, and 
possibilities for the future are  suggested.  
(C) A generalization is made, specific  situations in which it is applicable are  noted, 
and problems with it are  suggested.  
(D) An obser vation is made, specifics are  provided  to support it, and a  
generalization is derived.  
(E) A hypothesis is presented, its  implications are clarified, and  applications of it 
are discussed.  
22. The author uses all of the following  to clarify the distinction between  imprecision 534 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 and gross mistake in neural  development EXCEPT  
(A) classificati on of borderline  phenomena  
(B) a description of the relationship  between the phenomena denoted by each  
term 
(C) specific examples of the phenomena  denoted by each term  
(D) an explanation of at least one of the  key terms involved  
(E) analogies to other t ypes of phenomena  
23. Which of the following can be  inferred from the passage about the  genetic 
information of Daphniae?  
I. There is probably some degree of  redundancy in the information  controlling 
neural development.  
II. Most of the information for neura l development stored in the genes is used  
to specify the positions of the optic  neurons.  
III. There is sufficient information  to preclude the occurrence of gross  mistakes 
during neural development.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) I and II only  
(E) II and III only  
In a recent study, David Cressy examines two central questions concerning English 
immigration to New England in the 1630 s: what kinds of people immigrated and why? Using 
contemporary literary evidence, shipping lists, and customs r ecords, Cressy finds that most 
adult immigrants were skilled in farming or crafts, were literate, and were organized in families. 
Each of these characteristics sharply distinguishes the 21,000 people who left for New England 
in the 1630 s from most of the approximately 377,000 English people who had immigrating to 
America by 1700.  
With respect to their reasons for immigrating, Cressy does not deny the frequently noted 
fact that some of the immigrants of the 1630 s, most notably the organizers and clergy, 
advanced religious explanations for departure, but he finds that such explanations usually 
assumed primacy only in retrospect . When he moves beyond the principal actors, he finds that 
religious explanations were less frequently  offered and he concludes that most people 
immigrated because they were recruited by promises of material improvement.  
24. In the passage, the author is  primarily concerned with  
(A) summarizing the findings of an  investigation  
(B) analyzing a method of arg ument  
(C) evaluating a point of view  
(D) hypothesizing about a set of  circumstances  
(E) establishing categories   GRE  535 
 25. According to the passage, Cressy  would agree with which of the following  
statements about the organizers among  the English immigrants to New England  
in the 1630 s? 
I. Most of them were clergy.  
II. Some of them offered a religious  explanation for their immigration.  
III. They did not offer any reasons  for their immigration until some time  after 
they had immigrated.  
IV . They were more likely than the  average immigrant to be motivated by  
material considerations.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) II and III only  
(D) I, III, and IV only  
(E) II, III, and IV only  
26. According to the passage, Cressy has  made which of the following claims about  
what motivated English immigrants to go  to New England in the 1630 s? 
(A) They were motivated by religious  considerations alone.  
(B) They were mo tivated by economic  considerations alone.  
(C) They were motivated by religious and  economic considerations equally.  
(D) They were motivated more often by  economic than by religious  
considerations.  
(E) They were motivated more often by  religious than by economic  
considerations.  
27. The passage suggests that the majority of those English people who had  
immigrated to America by the late  seventeenth century were  
(A) clergy  
(B) young children  
(C) organized in families  
(D) skilled in crafts  
(E) illiterate  
SECTION B 
Is the literary critic like the poet, responding creatively, intuitively, subjectively to the 
written word as the poet responds to human experience? Or is the critic more like a scientist, 
following a series of  demonstrable, ve rifiable steps, using an objective method of analysis?  
For the woman who is a practitioner of feminist literary criticism, the subjectivity versus 
objectivity, or critic -as-artist-or-scientist, debate has special significance; for her, the question is 
not only academic, but political as well, and her definition will court special risks whichever side 
of the issue it favors. If she defines feminist criticism as objective and scientific a valid, 536 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 verifiable, intellectual  method that anyone, whether man or woma n, can perform the 
definition not only precludes the critic -as-artist approach, but may also impede accomplishment 
of the utilitarian political objectives of those who seek to  change the academic establishment 
and its thinking, especially about sex roles. If she defines feminist criticism as creative and 
intuitive, privileged as art, then her work becomes vulnerable to the prejudices of stereotypic 
ideas about the ways in which women think, and will be dismissed by much of the academic 
establishment. Becaus e of these prejudices, women who use an intuitive approach in their 
criticism may find themselves charged with inability to be analytical, to be objective, or to think 
critically. Whereas men may be free to claim the role of critic -as-artist, women run dif ferent 
professional risks when they choose intuition and private experience as critical method and 
defense.  
These questions are political in the sense that the debate over them will inevitably be less 
an exploration of abstract matters in a spirit of disin terested inquiry than an academic power 
struggle in which the careers and professional fortunes of many women scholars only now 
entering the academic profession in substantial numbers will be at stake , and with them the 
chances for a distinctive contribution to humanistic understanding, a contribution that might be 
an important influence against sexism in our society.  
As long as the academic establishment continues to regard objective analysis as 
masculine  and an intuitiv e approach as feminine,  the theoretician must steer a delicate 
philosophical course between the two. If she wishes to constr uct a theory of feminist criticism, 
she would be well advised to place it within the framework of a general theory of the critical  
process that is neither purely objective nor purely intuitive. Her theory is then more likely to be 
compared and contrasted with other theories of criticism with some degree of dispassionate  
distance.  
17. Which of the following titles best  summarizes the content of the passage?  
(A) How Theories of Literary Criticism  Can Best Be Used  
(B) Problems Confronting Women Who Are  Feminist Literary Critics  
(C) A Historical overview of Feminist  literary Criticism  
(D) A New Theory of Literary Criticism  
(E) Literary  Criticism: Art or Science?  
18. It can be inferred that the author  believes which of the following about  women 
who are literary critics?  
I. They can make a unique contribution  to society.  
II. They must develop a new theory of  the critical process.  
III. Their criticisms of literature  should be entirely objective.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III   GRE  537 
 19. The author specifically mentions all  of the following as difficulties that  
particularly affect women who are  theoreticians of feminist literary  criticism 
EXCEPT the  
(A) tendency of a predominantly male  academic establishment to f orm 
preconceptions about women  
(B) limitations that are imposed when  criticism is defined as objective and  
scientific  
(C) likelihood that the work of a woman  theoretician who claims the privilege of  
art will be viewed with prejudice by  some academics  
(D) i nescapability of power struggles  between women in the academic profession  
and the academic establishment  
(E) tendency of members of the academic  establishment to treat all forms of  
feminist literary theory with hostility  
20. According to the author, the debate  mentioned in the passage has special  
significance for the woman who is a  theoretician of feminis t literary criticism  for 
which of the following reasons?  
(A) There are large numbers of capable  women working within the academic  
establishment.  
(B) There are a few powerful feminist  critics who have been recognized by the  
academic establishment.  
(C) Like other critics, most women who  are literary critics define criticism as  
either scientific or artistic.  
(D) Women who are literary critics face  professional risks different from those  
faced by men who are literary critics.  
(E) Women who are literary critics are  more likely to participate in the debate  
than are men who are literary critics.  
21. Which of the following is presented  by the author in support of  the suggestion 
that there is stereoty pic thinking  among members of the academic  establishment ? 
(A) A distinctively feminist contribution  to humanistic understanding could work  
against the influence of sexism among  members of the academic 
establishment.  
(B) Women who define criticism as  artist ic may be seen by the academic  
establishment as being incapable of  critical thinking.  
(C) The debate over the role of the  literary critic is often seen as a  political one.  
(D) Women scholars are only now entering  academia in substantial numbers.  
(E) The woman who is a critic is forced  to construct a theory of literary  criticism.  
22. Which of the following is most likely  to be one of the utilitarian political  
objectives  mentioned by the author in  line 16? 
(A) To forge a new theory of literary  criticism  538 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) To pursue truth in a disinterested  manner  
(C) To demonstrate that women are  interested in literary criticism that  can be 
viewed either subjectively or  objectively  
(D) To convince the academic  establishment to revise the ways in  which it 
assesses women scholars  professional qualities  
(E) To dissuade women who are literary  critics from taking a subjective  approach 
to literary criticism  
23. It can be inferred that the author  would define as political  (line 30) questions 
that 
(A) are contested largely through  contentions over power  
(B) are primarily academic in nature and  open to abstract analysis  
(C) are not in themselves important  
(D) cannot be resolved without extensive  debate  
(E) will be debated by both men and women  
[This passage was excerpted from an  article published in 197 9.] 
Quantum mechanics  is a highly successful theory: it supplies methods for accurately 
calculating the results of diverse experiments, especially with minute particles. The predictions 
of quantum mechanics, however, give onl y the probability of an event, not a deterministic 
statement of whether or not the event will occur. Because of this probabilism, Einstein remained 
strongly dissatisfied with the theory throughout his life, though he did not maintain that 
quantum mechanics  is wrong. Rather, he held that it is incomplete: in quantum mechanics the 
motion of a particle must be described in terms of probabilities, he argued, only because some 
parameters that determine the motion have not been specified. If these hypothetical hidden 
parameters  were known, a fully deterministic trajectory could be defined. Significantly, this 
hidden -parameter quantum theory leads to experimental predictions different from those of 
traditional quantum mechanics. Einstein s ideas have been tested by experiments performed 
since his death, and as most of these experiments support traditional quantum mechanics, 
Einstein s approach is almost certainly erroneous.  
24. The author regards the idea that traditional quantum mechanics is incomplete 
with 
(A) a pproval  
(B) surprise  
(C) indifference  
(D) apprehension  
(E) skepticism  
25. It can be inferred from the passage  that the author s conclusion that  Einstein s 
approach is erroneous  (line 22) might have to be modified because  
(A) it is theoretically possib le to generate plausible theories with hidden  
parameters within them   GRE  539 
 (B) some experimental tests of Einstein s theory do not disconfirm the  
hidden -parameter theory of quantum  mechanics  
(C) it is possible for a theory to have  hidden parameters and yet be  probabilistic  
(D) traditional quantum mechanics has not  yet been used to analyze all of the  
phenomena to which it could be applied  
(E) there are too many possible hidden  parameters to develop meaningful tests  of 
hidden -parameter theories  
26. According to the passage, Einstein  posed objections to the  
(A) existence of hidden parameters in  quantum theory  
(B) probabilistic nature of q uantum  mechanics  
(C) idea that quantum mechanics is  incomplete  
(D) results of experiments testing  quantum theory  
(E) importance accorded quantum mechanics  in physics  
27. The passage suggests that which of  the following would have resulted if the  
experim ents mentioned in lines 18-20 had  not supported the predictions of  
traditional quantum mechanics?  
(A) Einstein, had he been alive, would  have revised his approach to quantum  
mechanics.  
(B) Hidden -parameter theories would have  been considered inaccurate 
descriptions  of real-world phenomena.  
(C) A deterministic description of the  motion of a particle might still be  
considered possible.  
(D) Quantum mechanics would have ceased  to attract the attention of physicists.  
(E) Einstein, had he been alive, would  have abandoned attempts to specify the  
hidden parameters that describe motion.  
1992 04   
SECTION A  
The 1960 s witnessed two profound social movements: the civil rights movement and the 
movement protesting the war in Vietnam. Although they overlapped in time, they were largely 
distinct. For a brief moment in 1967, however, it appeared that the two movements might unite 
under the leadership of Martin Luther King, Jr.  
Kings role in the antiwar movement appears to req uire little explanation, since he was the 
foremost advocate of nonviolence of his time. But King s stance on the Vietnam War cannot be 
explained in terms of pacifism alone. After all, he was something of a latecomer to the antiwar 
movement, even though by 1965 he was convinced that the role of the United States in the war 
was indefensible. Why then the two years that passed before he translated his private 
misgivings into public dissent? Perhaps he believed that he could not criticize American foreign 540 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 policy without endangering the support for civil rights that he had won from the federal 
government.  
17. According to the passage, the delay referred to in lines 12-15 is perhaps 
attributable to which of the following?  
(A) King s ambivalence concerning the role  of the United States in the war in 
Vietnam  
(B) King s attempts to consolidate support for his leadership within the civil  
rights movement  
(C) King s desire to keep the leadership of the civil rights movement distinct  from 
that of the antiwar movement  
(D) King s desire to draw support for the civil rights movement from the 
leadership of the antiwar movement  
(E) King s reluctance to jeopardize federal  support for the civil rights movement  
18. The author supports the claim that  King s stance on the Vietnam War cannot  be 
explained in terms of pacifism alone  (lines 10-12) by implying which of the  
following?  
(A) There is little evidence that King was ever a student of pacifist doctrine.  
(B) King, despite pacifist sympathies, was not convinced that the policy of the 
federal government in Vietnam was wrong.  
(C) King s belief in nonviolence was formulated in ter ms of domestic policy  
rather than in terms of international issues.  
(D) Had King s actions been based on pacifism alone, he would have joined the 
antiwar movement earlier than he actually did.  
(E) Opponents of United States foreign policy within the federal government  
convinced King of their need for support.  
19. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about the movement  
opposing the war in Vietnam?  
(A) It preceded the civil rights movement.  
(B) It began in 1965.  
(C) It was supported by many who otherwise opposed public dissent.  
(D) It drew support from most civil rights leaders.  
(E) It was well underway by 1967.  
20. Which of the following best describes the passage?  
(A) It  discuss es an apparent inconsistency and suggests a reason for it.  
(B) It outlines a sequence of historical events.  
(C) It shows why a commonly held view is inaccurate.  
(D) It evaluates an explanation and finally accepts that explanation.  
(E) It contras ts two views of an issue.   GRE  541 
 What causes a helix in nature to  appear with either a dextral ( right-handed,  or clockwise) 
twist or  a sinistral ( left-handed,  or counterclockwise) twist is one of the most intriguing 
puzzles in the science  of form. Most spiral -shaped snail  species are predominantly dextral. But 
at one time , handedness (twist direction of the shell) was equally distributed within some snail 
species that have become predominantly dextral or, in a few species, predominantly sinistral. 
What mechanisms, control handedness and keep left -handedness rare?  
It would seem unlikely that evolution should discriminate against  sinistral snails if sinistral 
and dextral snails are exact mirror images, for any disadvantage that a sinistral twist in itself 
could confer on its possessor is al most inconceivable. But left - and right -handed snails are not 
actually true mirror images of one another. Their shapes are noticeably different. Sinistral rarity 
might, then, be a consequence of possible disadvantages conferred by these other concomitant 
structural features. In addition, perhaps left - and right -handed snails cannot mate with each 
other, having incompatible twist directions. Presumably an individual of the rarer form would 
have relative difficulty in finding a mate of the same hand, thus kee ping the rare form rare or 
creating geographically separated right -and left -handed populations.  
But this evolutionary mechanism combining dissymmetry, anatomy, and chance does not 
provide an adequate explanation of why right -handedness should have become p redominant. It 
does not explain, for example, why the infrequent unions between snails of opposing hands 
produce fewer offspring of the rarer than the commoner form in species where each parent 
contributes equally to handedness. Nor does it explain why, in  a species where one parent 
determines handedness, a brood is not exclusively right - or left -handed when the offspring 
would have the same genetic predisposition. In the European pond snail Lymnaea peregra , a 
predominantly dextral species whose handedness is maternally determined, a brood might be 
expected to be  exclusively right or left -handed and this often occurs. However, some broods 
possess a few snails of the opposing hand, and in predominantly sinistral broods, the incidence 
of dextrality is surprisi ngly high.  
Here, the evolutionary theory must defer to a theory based on an explicit developmental 
mechanism that can favor either right or left -handedness. In the case of  Lymnaea peregra , 
studies indicate that a dextral gene is expressed during egg formation; i.e., before egg 
fertilization, the gene produces a protein, found in the cytoplasm of the egg, that controls the 
pattern of cell division  and thus handedness. In experiments, an injection of cytop lasm from 
dextral eggs changes the pattern of sinistral eggs, but an injection from sinistral eggs does not 
influence dextral eggs. One explanation for the differing effects is that all Lymnaea peregra  
eggs begin left -handed but most switch to being right -handed. Thus, the path to a solution to 
the puzzle of handedness in all snails appears to be as twisted as the helix itself.  
21. Which of the following would serve as  an example of concomitant structural  
features  (line 19) that might disadvantage a snail  of the rarer form?  
(A) A shell and body that are an exact mirror image of a snail of the commoner 
form  
(B) A smaller population of the snails of  the rarer form  
(C) A chip or fracture in the shell  caused by an object falling on it  
(D) A pattern on the shel l that better  camouflages it  542 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) A smaller shell opening that  restricts mobility and ingestion  relative to that of 
a snail of the  commoner form  
22. The second paragraph of the passage  is primarily concerned with offering  
possible reasons why  
(A) it is unlikely that evolutionary  mechanisms could discriminate against  
sinistral snails  
(B) sinistrality is relatively uncommon  among snail species  
(C) dextral and sinistral populations of  a snail species tend to intermingle  
(D) a theory based on a developmental  mechanism inadequately accou nts for the  
predominance of dextrality across snail  species  
(E) dextral snails breed more readily  than sinistral snails, even within  
predominantly sinistral populations  
23. In describing the evolutionary  mechanism  (line 27), the author  mentions which 
of the following?  
(A) The favorable conditions for  nurturin g new offspring  
(B) The variable environmental conditions  that affect survival of adult snails  
(C) The availability of potential mates  for breeding  
(D) The structural identity of offspring  to parents of the same hand  
(E) The frequency of unions between  snails of different species  
24. According to the passage, which of  the following is true of  Lymnaea  peregra ? 
(A) Handedness within the species was at  one time equally distributed between  
left and right.  
(B) Under laboratory conditions, dextral  eggs from Lymnaea peregra  can be  
artificially induced to develop into  sinistral snails.  
(C) Broods of Lymnaea peregra  are, without variation, exclusively sinistral  or 
dextral.  
(D) Handedness in Lymnaea peregra  offspring is determined by only one of  the 
parents.  
(E) Geographic factors have played a  larger role than has genetics in the  
evolution of the species.  
25. The passage implies that in Lymnaea  peregra , there will generally be  
(A) more offspring of the nondominant  hand in broods where handedness is  
determ ined after, rather than before, fertilization  
(B) a sinistral gene that produc es a protein in the cytoplasm of the egg cell  
(C) fewer sinistral offspring in dextral  broods than dextral offspring in  sinistral 
broods  
(D) equal numbers of exclusively left -and right -handed broods  
(E) an increasing occurrence of left -handedness in  successive broods   GRE  543 
 26. It can be inferred from the passage  that a predominantly sinistral snail  species 
might stay predominantly  sinistral for each of the following  reasons EXCEPT for  
(A) a developmenta l mechanism that  affects the cell -division pattern of  snails  
(B) structural features that advantage  dextral snails of the species  
(C) a relatively small number of snails  of the same hand for dextral snails of  the 
species to mate with  
(D) anatomical incompa tibility that  prevents mating between snails of  opposing 
hands within the species  
(E) geographic separation of sinistral  and dextral populations  
27. Which of the following accurately  describes the relationship between the  
evolutionary and developmental theories  discussed in the passage?  
(A) Although the two theories reach the  same c onclusion, each is based on  
different assumptions.  
(B) They present contradictory  explanations of the same phenomenon.  
(C) The second theory accounts for  certain phenomena that the first cannot  
explain.  
(D) The second theory demonstrates why  the first is v alid only for very  unusual, 
special cases.  
(E) They are identical and  interchangeable in that the second  theory merely 
restates the first in less  technical terms.  
SECTION B 
Recently some scientists have concluded that meteorites found on Earth and long believed 
to have a Martian origin might ac tually have been blasted free of Mars s gravity by the impact 
on Mars of other meteorites. This conclusion has led to another question: whether meteorite 
impacts on Earth have similarly driven rocks from this planet to Mars.  
According to astronomer S. A. P hinney, kicking a rock hard enough to free it from Earth s 
gravity would require a meteorite capable of making a crater more than 60 miles across. 
Moreover, even if Earth rocks were freed by meteorite impact, Mars s orbit is much larger than 
Earth s, so Ph inney estimates that the probability of these rocks hitting Mars is about one -tenth 
as great as that of Mars s rocks hitting Earth. To demonstrate this estimate, Phinney used a 
computer to calculate where 1,000 hypothetical particles would go if ejected fr om Earth in 
random directions. He found that 17 of the 1,000 particles would hit Mars.  
17. The passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) presenting an argument to support a  particular hypothesis  
(B) suggesting an answer to a theoretical  question  
(C) question ing the assumptions of a  research project  
(D) criticizing experimental results  
(E) explaining the origin of certain  scientific data  544 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 18. According to the passage, which of  the following events may have initiated  the 
process that led to the presence on  Earth of meteorites from Mars?  
(A) A meteorite struck the Earth with  tremendous velocity.  
(B) A meteorite collided with Mars.  
(C) Approximately 1,000 rocks were  ejected from Mars.  
(D) The orbits of Earth and Mars brought  the planets to their closest points.  
(E) Rocks from a meteorite impact broke  free of Earth s gravity.  
19. The passage suggests that which of the  following is true concerning the  
probability that a rock, if ejected from  Mars, will hit the Earth?  
(A) The probability is increased when  particl es are ejected from Mars in  random 
directions.  
(B) The probability is increased by the  presence of large craters on the surface  of 
Mars.  
(C) The probability is decreased when  Mars s orbit brings the planet close to  
Earth.  
(D) The probability is greater tha n the  probability that a rock from Earth will  hit 
Mars.  
(E) The probability is less than the  probability that a rock from Earth will  escape 
Earth s gravity.  
20. Which of the following, if true, would cast most doubt on Phinney s estimate of 
the probability of Earth  rocks hitting Mars?  
(A) Rather than going in random  directions, about 25 percent of all  particles 
ejected from Earth go in the  same direction into space.  
(B) Approximately 100 meteorites large  enough to make a noticeable crater hit 
the Earth each year.  
(C) No rocks of Earth origin have been  detect ed on Mars.  
(D) The velocity of rocks escaping from  Earth s gravity is lower than the velocity 
of meteorites hitting the  Earth.  
(E) No craters more than 60 miles across  have been found on Mars.  
A scientistic  view of language was dominant among philosophers and linguists who 
affected to develop a scientific analysis of human thought and behavior in the early part of this 
centu ry. Under the force of this view, it was perhaps inevitable that the art of rhetoric should 
pass from the status of being regarded as of questionable worth (because although it might be 
both a source of pleasure and a means to urge people to right action, it might also be a means 
to distort truth and a source of misguided action) to the status of being wholly condemned. If 
people are regarded only as machines guided by logic, as they were by these scientistic  
thinkers, rhetoric is likely to be held in low  regard; for the most obvious truth about rhetoric is 
that it speaks to the whole person. It presents its arguments first to the person as a rational 
being, because persuasive discourse, if honestly conceived, always has a basis in reasoning. 
Logical argum ent is the plot, as it were , of any speech or essay that is respectfully intended to  GRE  545 
 persuade people. Yet it is a characterizing feature of rhetoric that it goes beyond this and 
appeals to the parts of our nature that are i nvolved in feeling, desiring, acting, and suffering. It 
recalls relevant instances of the emotional reactions of people to circumstances real or 
fictional that are similar to our own circumstances. Such is the purpose of both historical 
accounts and fables  in persuasive discourse: they indicate literally or symbolically how people 
may react emotionally, with hope or fear, to particular circumstances. A speech attempting to 
persuade people can achieve little unless it takes into account the aspect of their b eing related 
to such hopes and fears.  
Rhetoric, then, is addressed to human beings living at particular times and in particular 
places. From the point of view of rhetoric, we are not merely logical thinking machines, 
creatures abstracted from time and spac e. The study of rhetoric should therefore be considered 
the most humanistic of the humanities, since rhetoric is not directed only to our rational selves. 
It takes into account what the scientistic  view leaves out . If it is a weakness to harbor feelings, 
then rhetoric may be thought of as dealing in weakness. But those who reject the idea of 
rhetoric because they believe it deals in  lies and who at the same time hope to move people to 
action, must eithe r be liars themselves or be very naive; pure logic has never been a motivating 
force unless it has been subordinated to human purposes, feelings, and desires, and thereby 
ceased to be pure logic.  
21. According to the passage, to reject  rhetoric and still h ope to persuade  people is  
(A) an aim of most speakers and writers  
(B) an indication either of dishonesty or  of credulity  
(C) a way of displaying distrust of the  audience s motives  
(D) a characteristic of most humanistic  discourse  
(E) a way of avoiding excessively  abstract reasoning  
22. It can be inferred from the passage  that in the late nineteenth century  rhetoric was 
regarded as  
(A) the only necessary element of  persuasive discourse  
(B) a dubious art in at least two ways  
(C) an outmoded and tedious amplification  of logic  
(D) an open offense to the rational mind  
(E) the most important of the humanistic  studies  
23. The passage suggests that the  disparagement of rhetoric by some people  can be 
traced to their  
(A) reaction again st science  
(B) lack of training in logic  
(C) desire to persuade people as  completely as possible  
(D) misunderstanding of the use of the  term scientistic  
(E) view of human motivation  
24. The passage suggests that a speech  that attempts to persuade peop le to act  is 546 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 likely to fail if it does NOT  
(A) distort the truth a little to make it  more acceptable to the audience  
(B) appeal to the self -interest as well  as the humanitarianism of the audience  
(C) address listeners  emotions as well  as their intellects  
(D) concede the logic of other points of  view  
(E) show how an immediately desirable  action is consistent with timeless  
principles  
25. The passage suggests that to consider  people as  thinking machines  (line 37) is 
to consider them as  
(A) beings separated from a historical  context  
(B) replaceable parts of a larger social  machine  
(C) more complex than other animals  
(D) liars rather than honest people  
(E) infallible in their reasoning  
26. Which of the following persuasive  devices is NOT  used in the passage?  
(A) A sample of an actual speech  deliver ed by an  orator  
(B) The contrast of different points of  view  
(C) The repetition of key ideas and  expressions  
(D) An analogy that seeks to explain  logical argument  
(E) Evaluative or judgmental words  
27. Which of the following best states  the author s mai n point about logical  
argument?  
(A) It is a sterile, abstract discipline, of little use in  real life.  
(B) It is an essential element of  persuasive discourse, but only one such  element.  
(C) It is an important means of  persuading people to act against their  desires.  
(D) It is the lowest order of discourse  because it is the least imaginative.  
(E) It is essential to persuasive  discourse because it  deals with  universal truths.  
1992 10   
SECTION A  
Hank Morgan, the hero of Mark Twain s A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur s Court, is a 
nineteenth -century master mechanic who mysteriously awakenin g in sixth -century Britain, 
launches what he hopes will be a peaceful revolution to transform Arthurian Britain into an 
industrialized modern democracy. The novel, written  as a spoof  of Thomas Malory s Morte d  
Arthur , a popular c ollection of fifteenth -century legends about sixth -century Britain , has been 
made into three upbeat movies  and two musical comedies. None of these translations to screen 
and stage, however, dramatize the anarchy at the conclusion of  A Connecticut Yankee , which  GRE  547 
 ends with  the violent overthrow of Morgan s three -year-old progressive order and his return to 
the nineteenth century, where he apparently commits suicide after being labeled a lunatic for 
his incoherent babblings about  drawbridges and battlements. The American public, although 
enjoying Twain s humor, evidently rejected his cynicism about technological advancement and 
change through peaceful revolution as antithetical to the United States doctrine of progress.  
17. Accord ing to the passage, which of  the following is a true statement about the 
reception of A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur s Court  by the American 
public?  
(A) The public had too strong a belief in the doctrine of progress to accept the 
cynicism demonstrated  at the conclusion of Twain s novel.  
(B) Twain s novel received little public  recognition until the work was adapted 
for motion pictures and plays.  
(C) Although the public enjoyed Twain s humor , his use of both sixth -century and 
nineteenth -century characte rs confused many people.  
(D) The public has continued to enjoy Twain s story , but the last part of the novel 
seems too violent to American minds.  
(E) Because of the cynicism at the end of the book, the public rejected Twain s 
work in favor of the work of Thomas Malory.  
18. The author uses the examples of three upbeat movies and two musical 
comedies  (lines 9 -10) primarily in order to demonstrat e that  
(A) well -written novels like A Connecticut  Yankee in King Arthur s Court , 
regardless of their tone or theme, can be translated to the stage and screen  
(B) the American public has traditionally been more interested in watching plays 
and movies than i n reading novels like  A Connecticut Yankee in King 
Arthur s Court  
(C) Twain s overall message in A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur s Court  is 
one that had a profound impact on the American public  
(D) Twain s A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur s Court  has been a more 
popular version of the Arthurian legends than has Malory s Morte  d Arthur  
(E) A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur s Court  has been accepted as an 
enjoyable and humorous tale in versions that have omitted the anarchy at the 
novel s conclus ion 
19. The author of the passage characterizes Thomas Malory s Morte d  Arthur as 
which of the following?  
(A) The best -known and most authoritative collection of Arthurian tales written in 
the English language  
(B) A collection of legends that have been us ed as the basis for three movies and 
two musical comedies  
(C) A historical account of King Arthur, the sixth -century king of Britain  
(D) A collection of legends about sixth -century Britain that  have existed since at 548 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 least the fifteenth century  
(E) The novel about the life of King Arthur that inspired Twain s cynicism about 
nineteenth -century notions of progress  
20. It can be inferred from the passage that Mark Twain would most probably have 
believed in which of the following statements about  societal change?  
(A) Revolutions, in order to be successful in changing society, have to be carried 
out without violence.  
(B) Technological advancements are limited in their ability to change society and 
will likely bring liabilities along with any potent ial benefits.  
(C) The belief in the unmitigated benefits of societal chan ge is antithetical to the 
American doctrine of progress.  
(D) The political system of sixth -century Britain was more conducive to societal 
change than was the political system of ninet eenth -century America.  
(E) Technological advance s and peaceful revolutions, although sometimes 
accompanied by unintended violence and resistance to societal change , 
eventually lead to a more progressive order.  
The intensive work of materials scientists and solid -state physicists has given rise to a class 
of solids known as amorphous metallic alloys , or glassy metals. There is a growing interest 
among theoretical and applied  researchers alike in the structural properties of these materials.  
When a molten metal or metallic alloy is cooled to a solid, a crystalline structure is formed 
that depends on the particular alloy composition. In contrast , molten nonmetallic glass -forming 
materials , when cooled , do not assume a crystalline structure, but instead retai n a structure 
somewhat like that of the liquid an amorphous structure. At room temperature , the natural 
long-term tendency for both types of materials is to assume the crystalline structure. The 
difference between the t wo is in the kinetics or rate of formation of the crystalline structure , 
which is controlled by factors such as the nature of the chemical bonding and the ease with  
which atoms move relative to each other. Thus, in metals, the kinetics favors rapid formati on of 
a crystalline structure, whereas in nonmetallic glasses the rate of formation is so slow that 
almost any cooling rate is  sufficient to result in an amorphous structure. For glassy metals to be 
formed, the molten metal must be  cooled extremely rapidly  so that crystallization is 
suppressed.  
The structure of glassy metals is thought to be similar to that of liquid metals. One of the 
first attempts to model the structure of a liquid was that by the late J. D. Bernal of the 
University of London, who packed  hard spheres into a rubber vessel in such a way as to obtain 
the maximum possible density. The resulting dense, random -packed structure was the basis for 
many attempts to model the structure of glassy metals. Calculations of the density of alloys 
based on  Bernal -type models of the alloys metal component agreed fairly well with the 
experimentally determined  values from measurements on alloys consisting of a noble metal  
together with a metalloid, such as alloys of palladium and silicon, or alloys consisting of iron, 
phosphorus, and carbon, although small discrepancies remained. One difference between real 
alloys and the hard spheres used in Bernal models is that the components of an alloy have 
different sizes, so that mode ls based on two sizes of spheres are more appropriate for a binary  GRE  549 
 alloy, for example. The smaller metalloid atoms of the alloy might fit into holes in the dense, 
random -packed structure of the larger metal atoms.  
One of the most promising properties of glassy metals is t heir high strength combined with 
high malleability. In usual crystalline materials, one finds an inverse relation  between the two 
properties, whereas for many practical applications simultaneous presence of both properties is 
desirable. One residual obstacle to practical applications that is likely to be overcome is the fact 
that glassy metals will crystallize at relatively low temperatures when heated slightly.  
21. The author is primarily concerned with discussing  
(A) crystalline s olids and their behavior at different temperatures  
(B) molten materials and the kinetics of the formation of their crystalline structure  
(C) glassy metals and their structural characteristics  
(D) metallic alloys and problems in determining their density  
(E) amorphous materials and their practical utilization  
22. The author implies that the rate at which the molten materials discussed in the 
passage are cooled is a determinant of the  
(A) chemical composition of the resulting solids  
(B) strength of the chemical bonds that are formed  
(C) kinetics of the materials  crystalline structure  
(D) structure the materials assume  
(E) stability of the materials  crystalline structure  
23. The author s speculation about the appropriateness of models using spheres o f 
two sizes for binary alloys would be strongly supported if models using spheres 
of two sizes yielded  
(A) values for density identical to values yielded by one -sphere models using the 
smaller spheres only  
(B) values for density agreeing nearly perfectly w ith experimentally determined 
values  
(C) values for density agreeing nearly perfectly with values yielded by models 
using spheres of three  sizes  
(D) significantly different values for density depending on the size ratio between 
the two kinds of spheres use d 
(E) the same values for density as the values for appropriately chosen models that 
use only medium -sized spheres  
24. The author s attitude toward the prospects for the economic utilization of glassy 
metals is one of  
(A) disinterest  
(B) impatience  
(C) optimism  550 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) apprehension  
(E) skepticism  
25. According to the passage, which of the following determines the crystalline 
structure of a metallic alloy?  
(A) A t what rate the molten alloy is cooled  
(B) How rapid the rate of formation of the crystalline ph ase is  
(C) How the different -sized atoms fit into a dense, random -packed structure  
(D) What the alloy consists of and in what ratios  
(E) At what temperature the molten alloy becomes solid  
26. Which of the following best describes the relationship betwee n the structure of 
liquid metals and the structure of glassy metals, as it is presented in the passage?  
(A) The latter is an illustrative example of the former.  
(B) The latter is a large -scale version of the former.  
(C) The former is a structural elaborati on of the latter.  
(D) The former provides an instructive contrast to the latter.  
(E) The former is a fair approximation of the latter.  
27. It can be inferred from the passage that, theoretically, molten nonmetallic glasses 
assume a crystalline structure rather than an amorphous structure only if they are 
cooled  
(A) very evenly, reg ardless of the rate  
(B) rapidly, followed by gentle heating  
(C) extremely slowly  
(D) to room temperature  
(E) to extremely low temperatures  
SECTION B 
In a perfectly free and open market economy, the type of employer government or 
privateshould have litt le or no impact on the earnings differentials between women and men. 
However, if there is discrimination against one sex, it is unlikely that the degree of 
discrimination by government and private employers will be the same. Differences in the 
degree of di scrimination would result in earnings differentials associated with the type of 
employer . Given the nature of government and private employers, it seems most likely that 
discrimination by private employers would be greater. Thus, one would expect that, if women 
are being discriminated against, government employment would have a positive effect on 
women s earnings as compared with their earnings from private employment. The results of a 
study by Fuchs  support this assumption. Fuchs s results suggest that the  earnings of women in 
an industry composed entirely of government employers would be 14. 6 percent greater than 
the earnings of women in an industry composed exclusively of private employees, other things 
being equal.   GRE  551 
 In addition, both Fuchs and Sanborn ha ve suggested that the effect of discrimination by 
consumers on the  earnings of self -employed women may be greater than the effect of either 
government or private employer  discrimination on the earnings of women employees. To test 
this hypothesis, Brown sel ected a large sample of White male and female workers from the 
1970 Census and divided them into three categories: private employees, government 
employees, and self -employed. (Black workers were excluded from the sample to avoid picking 
up earnings differe ntials that were the result of racial disparities.) Brown s research design 
controlled for education, labor -force participation, mobility, motivation, and age in order to 
eliminate these factors as explanations of the study s results. Brown s results sugge st that men 
and women are not treated the same by employers and consumers. For men, self -employment 
is the highest earnings category, with private employment next, and government lowest. For 
women, this order is reversed.  
One can infer from Brown s results  that consumers discriminate against self -employed 
women. In addition, self -employed women may have more difficulty than men in getting good 
employees and may encounter discrimination from suppliers and from financial institutions.  
Brown s results are clea rly consistent with Fuch s argument that discrimination by 
consumers has a greater impact on the earnings of women than does discrimination by either 
government or private employers. Also, the fact that women do better working for government 
than for priva te employers implies that private employers are discriminating against women. 
The results do not prove that government does not discriminate against women. They do, 
however, demonstrate that if government is discriminating against women, its discrimination  is 
not having as much effect on women s earnings as is discrimination in the private sector.  
17. The passage mentions all of the following as difficulties that self -employed 
women may encounter EXCEPT:  
(A) discrimination from suppliers  
(B) discrimination from consumers  
(C) discrimination from financial institutions  
(D) problems in obtaining good employees  
(E) problems in obtaining government assistance  
18. The author would be most likely to agree with which of the following 
conclusions about discriminat ion against women by private employers and by 
government employers?  
(A) Both private employers and government employers discriminate, with equal  
effects on women s earnings.  
(B) Both private employers and government employers discriminate, but the 
discrimi nation by private employers has a greater effect on women s 
earnings.  
(C) Both private employers and government employers discriminate, but the 
discrimination by government employers has a greater effect on women s 
earnings.  
(D) Private employers discrimin ate; it is possible that government employers 552 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 discriminate.  
(E) Private employers discriminate; government employers do not discriminate.  
19. A study of the practices of financial institutions that revealed no discrimination 
against self -employed women would tend to contradict which of the following?  
(A) Some tentative results of Fuchs s study  
(B) Some explicit results of Brown s study  
(C) A suggestion made by the author  
(D) Fuchs s hypothesis  
(E) Sanborn s hypothesis  
20. According to Brown s study, w omen s earnings categories occur in which or  the 
following orders, from highest earnings to lowest earnings?  
(A) Government employment, self -employment, private employment  
(B) Government employment, private employment, self -employment  
(C) Private employmen t, self-employment, government employment  
(D) Private employment, government employment, self -employment  
(E) Self -employment, private employment, government employment  
21. The passage explicitly answers which of the following questions?  
(A) Why were Black workers excluded from the sample used in Brown s study?  
(B) Why do private employers illuminate more against women than do 
government employers?  
(C) Why do self -employed women have more difficulty than men in hiring 
high-quality employees?  
(D) Why do suppliers discriminate against self -employed women?  
(E) Are Black women and Black men treated similarly  by employers a nd 
consumers?  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that the statements in the last paragraph are 
most probably which of the following?  
(A) Brown s elaboration of his research results  
(B) Brown s tentative inference from his data  
(C) Brown s conclusions, based on common -sense reasoning  
(D) The author s conclusions, based on Fuchs s and Brown s results  
(E) The author s criticisms of Fuchs s argument, based on Brown s results  
23. Which of the following titles best describes the content of the passage as a 
whole?  
(A) The Necessity for Earnings Differentials in a Free Market Economy  
(B) Why Discriminati on Against Employed Women by Government Employers 
and Private Employers Differs from Discrimination Against Self-Employ ed  GRE  553 
 Women by Consumers  
(C) How Discrimination Affects Women s Choice of Type of Employment  
(D) The Relative Effect of Private Employer Dis crimination on Men s Earnings 
as Compared to Women s Earnings  
(E) The Relative Effect of Discrimination by Government Employers, Private 
Employers, and Consumers on Women s Earnings  
The success of fluoride in combating dental decay is well established and, without a doubt , 
socially bene ficial. However, fluoride s toxic properties have been known for a century. In 
humans excessive intake (for adult s, over 4 milligrams per day) over many years can lead to 
skeletal fluorosis, a well -defined skeletal disorder, and in some plant species, fluo ride is more 
toxic than ozone, sulfur dioxide, or pesticides.  
Some important questions remain. For example, the precise lower limit at which the 
fluoride content of bone becomes toxic is still undetermined. And while fluoride intake from 
water and air can be evaluated relatively easily, it is much harder to estimate how much a given 
population ingests from foodstuffs because of the wide variations in individual eating habits and 
in fluoride concentrations in foodstuffs. These difficulties suggest that we sh ould by wary of 
indiscriminately using fluoride, even in the form of fluoride -containing dental products.  
24. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) analyzing and categorizing  
(B) comparing and contrasting  
(C) synthesizing and predictin g 
(D) describing and cautioning  
(E) summarizing and reinterpreting  
25. The passage suggests that it would be easier to calculate fluoride intake from food 
if 
(A) adequate diets were available for  most people.  
(B) individual eating habits were more  unifo rm 
(C) the fluoride content of food was more  varied  
(D) more people were aware of the  fluoride content of food  
(E) methods for measuring the fluoride  content of food were more generally 
agreed on  
26. One function of the second paragraph of the passage i s to 
(A) raise doubts about fluoride s toxicity  
(B) introduce the issue of fluoride s toxicity  
(C) differentiate a toxic from a nontoxic amount of fluoride  
(D) indicate that necessary knowledge of fluoride remains incomplete  
(E) discuss the foodstuffs t hat are most likely to contain significant 
concentrations of fluoride  554 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 27. The passage suggests which of the following about the effect of fluoride on 
humans?  
(A) The effect is more easily measured than is the effect of exposure to pesticides.  
(B) The effec t of fluoride intake from water and air is relatively difficult to 
monitor.  
(C) In general the effect is not likely to be as harmful as the effect of exposure to 
sulfur dioxide.  
(D) An intake of 4 milligrams over a long period of time usually leads to a 
skeletal disorder in humans.  
(E) An intake of slightly more than 4 milligrams for only a few months is not 
likely to be life -threatening.  
1993 02   
SECTION A  
It is now established that the Milky  Way is far more extended and of much  greater mass 
than was h itherto thought. However, all that is visible of the  constituents of the Milky Way s 
corona  (outer edge),  where much of the galaxy s mass must be located, is a tiny fraction  of the 
corona s mass. Thus, most of the  Milky Way s outlying matter must be dark.  
Why? Three facts are salient. First, dwarf galaxies and globular clusters,  into which most of 
the stars of the Milky Way s corona ar e probably bound,  consist mainly of old stars. Second,  old 
stars are not highly luminous. Third, no one has detected in the corona  the clouds of gaseous 
matter such as  hydrogen and carbon monoxide that are  characteristic of the bright parts of a  
galaxy. At present, therefore, the best  explanation though still quite  tentative for the 
darkness of the  corona is that the corona is composed  mainly of old, burned -out stars.  
17. The passage as a whole is primarily concerned with  
(A) analyzing a current debate  
(B) criticizing a well -established theory  
(C) showing how new facts support a  previously dismissed hypothesis  
(D) stating a conc lusion and adducing evidence that may justify it  
(E) contrasting two types of phenomena and showing how they are related  
18. According to the passage, a bright part of a galaxy  typically includes  
(A) dwarf galaxies and clusters of stars  
(B) a balanced m ixture of old and new stars  
(C) a large portion of the galaxy s mass  
(D) part of the corona of the galaxy  
(E) gases such as hydrogen and carbon monoxide  
19. It can be inferred from the passage  that, compared with what they now think,  GRE  555 
 until fairly recent ly astronomers believed that the Milky Way  
(A) was much darker  
(B) was much smaller  
(C) was moving much more slowly  
(D) had a much larger corona  
(E) had much less gaseous matter  
20. The passage presents which of the following as incontrovertible?  
I. The low luminosity of old stars  
II. The absence of clouds of gaseous  matter from the corona of the Milky Way  
III. The predominance of globular  clusters and dwarf galaxies in the corona of 
the Milky Way  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only 
(E) I, II, and III  
One of the principal themes of Walzer s critique of liberal capitalism is that it is insufficiently 
egalitarian. Walzer s case against the economic inequality generated by capitalism and in favor 
of a radical redistribution of wealt h is presented in a widely cited essay entitled In Defense of 
Equality.  
The most striking feature of Wa lzers critique is that, far from  rejecting the principle of 
reward according to merit,  Walzer insists  on its validity. People who exc el should receive the 
superior benefits appropriate to their excellence. But people exhibit a great variety of qualities
intelligence, physical strength , agility and grace , artistic creativity, mechanical skill , 
leadership, endurance, memory, psychologica l insight , the capacity for hard work even moral 
strength, sensitivity , the ability to express  compassion.  Each deserves its proper recompense , 
and hence a proper distribution of material goods should reflect human differences as 
measured on all these dif ferent scales. Yet, under capitalism, the ability to make money ( the 
green thumb  of bourgeois society ) enables its possessor to acquire almost every other sort of 
social good , such as the respect and esteem of o thers.  
The centerpiece of Walzer s argument is the invocation of a quotation from Pascal s 
Pensees , which concludes: Tyranny is the wish to obtain by one means what can only be had 
by another.  Pascal believes that we owe different duties  to different qualities. So we might say 
that infatuation is the proper response to charm, and awe the proper response to strength. In 
this light, Walzer characterizes capitalism as the tyranny of money (or of the ability to make it) . 
And Walzer advocates as the means of eliminating this tyranny and of restoring genuine 
equality the abolition of the power of money outside its sphere . What Walzer envisions is a 
society in which wealth is no  longer convertible into social good s with which it has  no intrinsic 
connection.  
Walzer s argument is a puzzling one. After all, why  should those qualities unrelated to the 556 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 production of  material goods be rewarded with material goods? Is it  not tyrannical, in Pascal s 
sense, to insist that t hose who  excel in sensitivity  or the ability to express compassion  merit 
equal wealth with those who excel in qualities (such as the capacity for hard work ) essential 
in producing wealth? Yet Wa lzers argument, however  deficient, does point to one of  the most 
serious weaknesses of capitalism namely, that it brings to predominant positions in a society 
people who, no matter how  legitimately they have earned their material rewards,  often lack 
those other qualities that evoke affection or  admiration.  Some even argue plausibly that this 
weakness may be irremediable: in any society that, like a  capitalist society, seeks to become 
ever wealthier in  material terms disproportionate rewards are bound to  flow to the people who 
are instrumental in producing  the increase in its wealth.  
21. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) argue that Walzer s critique of liberal capitalism  is the cornerstone of 
Walzer s thinking  
(B) identify and to deprecate the origins of the  intellectual tradition championed 
by Walzer  
(C) present more clearly than does the essay In Defense of Equality  the 
distinctive features  of Walzer s politico -economic theories  
(D) demonstrate that Walzer s critique of liberal  capitalism is neither original nor 
persuasive  
(E) outline and to examine critically Walzer s position on economic equality  
22. The author mentions all of the following as issues  addressed by Walzer EXCEPT:  
(A) proper recompense for individual excellence  
(B) proper interpretation of economic equal ity 
(C) proper level of a society s wealth  
(D) grounds for calling capitalism the tyranny of  money  
(E) exchangeability of money for social goods  
23. The argumentation in the passage turns importantly  on the question of what 
should be the proper relat ion between  
(A) liberal capitalism  (line 2) and bourgeois  society  (lines 20 -21) 
(B) reward  (line 8) and recompense  (line 17)  
(C) sensitivity  (line 15) and the ability to express  compassion  (lines 15 -16) 
(D) distribution of material goods  (lines 17 -18) and redistribution of wealth  
(lines 4 -5) 
(E)  social goods  (line 37) and material  goods  (line 41)  
24. The passage provides sufficient information to  answer which of the following 
questions?  
(A) What weight in relation to other qualities  should a quality like sensitivity 
have,  according to Walzer, in determining the proper distribution of goods?  
(B) Which quality does Walzer deem too highly  valued under liberal capitalism?   GRE  557 
 (C) Which are the social goods that are , according  to Walzer, outside the reach of 
the power of  money?  
(D) What practica l steps does Walzer suggest be  taken to relieve the economic 
inequality  generated by capitalism?  
(E) What deficiencies in Walzers own argument does Walzer acknowledge?  
25. The author implies that Walzer s interpretation of the principle of reward 
according to merit is distinctive for its  
(A) insistence on maximizing everyone s rewards  
(B) emphasis on equality  
(C) proven validity  
(D) broad conception of what constitutes merit  
(E) broad conception of what constitutes a reward  
26. The author s interpretation of the principle that we owe different duties to 
different qualities  (lines 28 -29) suggests that which of the following would most 
probably be the duty paired with the quality of veracity?  
(A) Dignity  
(B) Trust  
(C) Affection  
(D) Obedience  
(E) Integrity  
27. The author implies that sensitivity is not a quality that  
(A) is essential in producing wealth  
(B) wealthy people lack  
(C) can be sensibly measured on a scale  
(D) characterizes tyrannical people  
(E) is owed a duty in Pascal s sense  
SECTION B 
The outpouring of contemporary American Indian literature in the last two decades, often 
called the Native American Renaissance, represents for many the first opportunity to 
experience Native American poetry. The appreciation of traditional oral  American Indian 
literature has been limited, hampered by poor translations and by the difficulty, even in the rare 
culturally sensitive and aesthetically satisfying translation, of completely conveying the 
original s verse structure, tone, and syntax.  
By writing in English and experimenting with European literary forms, contemporary 
American Indian writers have broadened their potential audience, while clearly retaining many 
essential characteristics of their ancestral oral traditions. For example, Pulitze r-prizewinning 
author N. Scott Momaday s poetry often treats art and mortality in a manner that recalls British 558 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 romantic poetry, while his poetic response to the power of natural forces recalls Cherokee oral 
literature. In the same way, his novels, an art form European in origin, display an eloquence 
that echoes the oratorical grandeur of the great nineteenth -century American Indian chiefs.  
17. According to the passage, Momaday s poetry shares which of the following with 
British romantic poetry?  
(A) Verse s tructure  
(B) Oratorical techniques  
(C) Manner of treating certain themes  
(D) Use of certain syntactical constructions  
(E) Patterns of rhythm and rhyme  
18. Which of the following is most likely  one of the reasons that the author mentions 
the work of N. Scott Momaday?  
(A) To illustrate how the author believes that members of the Native American 
Renaissance have broadene d their potential audience  
(B) To emphasize the similarities between Momaday s writings and their 
European literary models  
(C) To demonstrate the contemporary appeal of traditional Native American oral 
literature  
(D) To suggest that contemporary American I ndian  writers have sacrificed 
traditional  values for popular literary success  
(E) To imply the continuing popularity of  translations of oral American Indian 
literature  
19. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about written 
translations of oral Native American poetry?  
(A) They were less widely read than are the  works of contemporary Native 
American poets writing in English.  
(B) They were often made by writers who were intimately familiar with both 
English and Native American languages.  
(C) They often gave their readers aesthetic satisfaction, despite their inacc uracies.  
(D) They usually lacked complex verse structure.  
(E) They were overly dependent on European literary models.  
20. The passage suggests which of the following about American Indian poets before 
the Native American Renaissance?  
(A) Art and mortality were rarely the subjects of their poetry.  
(B) Their or atorical grandeur reached its peak in the nineteenth century.  
(C) They  occasionally translated their own poetry.  
(D) They seldom wrote poetry in English.  
(E) They emphasized structure, tone, and syntax  rather than literary form.   GRE  559 
 Recent findings suggest that visual signals are fed into at least three separate processing 
systems in the brain, each with its own distinct function. One system  appears to process 
information about shape perception; a second, information about color; a third, information 
about m ovement,  location,  and spatial organization. An understanding of the functions and 
capabilities of these  three systems can shed light on how artists manipulate materials to create 
surprising visual effects.  
It is possible to summarize the functions of the three subsystems of the visual system as 
follows. The parvo system carries highly detailed information about stationary objects and 
about borders that are formed by contrasting colors. It does not, however, carry information 
about specific colors. Because much  of the information about the shape of objects can be 
represented by their borders, we suspect that this system is important  in shape perception. The 
blob system processes information about colors, but not about movement, shape discrimination, 
or depth . The magno system carries information about movement and depth. It is good at 
detecting motion but poor at scrutinizing stationary images. In addition it appears to be 
colorblind; it is unable to perceive borders that are visible only on the basis of colo r contrast.  
Cells in the parvo system can distinguish between two colors at any relative brightness of 
the two.  Cells in  the color -blind magno system , on the other hand, are analogous to a 
black-and-white photograph in the way they function: they signal in formation about the 
brightness of surfaces but not about their colors. For any pair of colors there is a particular 
brightness ratio at which two colors, for example red and green, will appear as the same shade 
of gray in a black -and-white photograph, henc e any border between them will vanish. Similarly 
at some relative red -to-green brightness level, the red and green will appear identical to the 
magno system. The red and green are then called equiluminant. A border between two 
equiluminant colors has color  contrast but no luminance contrast . 
Many artists have seemed to be empirically aware of these underlying principles and have 
used them to maximize  particular  effects.  Some of the  peculiar effects of Op Art , for example, 
probably arise from color combinations that are strong activators of the parvo system but are 
weak stimuli for the magno system. An object that is equiluminant with its background looks 
vibrant and unstable. The reason is that the parvo system can signal the object s shape but the 
magno system cannot see its borders and therefore cannot signal either the movement or the 
position of the object. Hence it seems to jump around, drift, or vibrate on the  canvas.  
21. The passage is primarily con cerned with  
(A) describing subsystems of the visual system and showing their relevance to art  
(B) comparing three theories on how the visual system analyzes images in a work 
of art  
(C) explaining how artists use color contrasts to create particular visual effects  
(D) explaining how the visual system distinguishes among different colors  
(E) describing functions of the first three phases of the visual system  
22. Which of the following would create visual effects most similar to those 
discussed in lines 43-48? 
(A) A watercolor in which colors are applied imprecisely to outlined shapes  560 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) A painting in which different shades of the same color are used to obscure the 
boundaries between objects  
(C) A black -and-white sketch in which shading is used to convey a sense of  depth  
(D) An advertisement in which key words are at the same level of brightness as a 
background of contrasting color  
(E) A design in which two different shades of gray are juxtaposed to heighten the 
contrast between them  
23. The passage provides information about which of the following?  
(A) Why the same system can process information about movement and location  
(B) W hy the parvo system is considered to be responsible for shape perception  
(C) Why the blob system can process information about colors but not movement  
(D) The mechanism that enables the blob system to distinguish between 
stationary objects  
(E) The mecha nism that enables the magno system to carry information about 
shape discrimination  
24. According to the passage, which of the following is true of the visual system?  
(A) It processes visual signals in three consecutive stages.  
(B) It processes visual signa ls through separate processing systems in the brain.  
(C) It consists of only three separate systems.  
(D) It consists of a single hierarchical system rather than a multipartite system.  
(E) It consists of separate system with high overlap in processing functions.  
25. The author mentions a  black -and-white photograph  (line 29)  most probably in 
order to explain  
(A) how the parvo system distinguishes between different shapes and colors  
(B) how the magno system uses luminosity to identify borders between objects  
(C) the mechanism that makes the magno system color -blind  
(D) why the magno system is capable of perceiving moving images  
(E) the brightness ratio at which colors become indist inguishable to the parvo 
system  
26. The author uses all of the following in the discussion in the third paragraph 
EXCEPT:  
(A) an example  
(B) definition of terms  
(C) contrast  
(D) a rhetorical question  
(E) analogy  
27. The passage suggests which of the fol lowing about the magno system?   GRE  561 
 (A) It perceives borders on the basis of luminance contrast.  
(B) It perceives shapes on the basis of color contrast.  
(C) It is better at perceiving stationary objects than it is at detecting movement.  
(D) It can detect motion  but it cannot signal the position of an object.  
(E) It is better at processing information about movement than it is at processing 
information about depth.  
1993 04   
SECTION A  
Although, recent years have seen substantial reductions in noxious pollutants from 
individual motor vehicles, the number of such vehicles has been steadily increasing 
consequently, more than 100 cities in the  United States still have levels of carbon monoxide, 
particulate matter , and ozone (generated by photochemical reactions with hydrocarbons  from 
vehicle exhaust) that exceed legally established limits. There is a growing realization that the 
only effective way to achieve further reductions in vehicle emissions short of  a massive shift 
away from  the private automobile is to replace conventional diesel fuel and gasoline with 
cleaner -burning fuels such as compressed natural gas, liquefied  petroleum gas , ethanol, or 
methanol.  
All of these alternatives are carbon -based fuels whose molecules are smaller and simpler 
than those of gasoline . These molecules burn  more cleanly than gasoline, in part because they 
have fewer, if and, carbon -carbon bonds, and the hydrocarbons they do emit are less likely to 
generate ozone. The combustion of larger molecules, which have multiple carbon -carbon bonds, 
involves a more com plex series of reactions. These reactions increase the probability of 
incomplete combustion and are more likely to release uncombusted and photochemically active 
hydrocarbon compounds into the atmosphere. On the other hand, alternative fuels do have 
drawba cks. Compressed natural gas would require that vehicles have a set of heavy fuel tanks
a serious liability in terms of performance and fuel efficiency and liquefied petroleum gas 
faces fundamental limits on supply.  
Ethanol and methanol, on the other hand, have important advantages over other 
carbon -based alternative fuels : they have a higher energy content  per volume and would 
require minimal changes in the existing network for distributing motor fuel. Ethanol is 
commonly used as a  gasoline supplement, but it is  currently about twice as expensive as 
methanol, the low cost of  which is one of its attractive features. Methanol s most attractive 
feature, however, is that it can reduce by about 90 percent the vehicle emissions that form 
ozone, the most serious urban air pollutant . 
Like any alternative fuel, methanol has its critics . Yet much of the criticism is based on the 
use of gasoline clone  vehicles that do not incorporate even the simplest  design improvements 
that are made possibl e with the use of methanol. It is true, for example, that a given volume of 
methanol provides only about one -half of the energy  that gasoline and diesel fuel do; other 
things being equal, the fuel tank would have to be somewhat larger and  heavier. However,  since 
methanol -fueled vehicles could be designed to be much more efficient than gasoline clone  562 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 vehicles fueled with methanol, they would need comparatively less fuel. Vehicles incorporating 
only the simplest of the engine improvements that methanol make s feasible would still 
contribute to an immediate lessening of urban air pollution.  
17. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) countering a flawed argument that dismisses a possible solution to a problem  
(B) reconciling contradictory points of view about the nature of a problem  
(C) identifying the strengths of possible solutions to a problem  
(D) discussing a problem a nd arguing in favor of one solution to it  
(E) outlining a plan of action to solve a problem and discussing the obstacles 
blocking that plan  
18. According to the passage, incomplete combustion is more likely to occur with 
gasoline than with an alternativ e fuel because  
(A) the combustion of gasoline releases photochemically active hydrocarbons  
(B) the combustion of gasoline involves an intricate series o f reactions  
(C) gasoline molecules have a simple molecular structure  
(D) gasoline is composed of small m olecules.  
(E) gasoline is a carbon -based fuel  
19. The passage suggests  which of the following about air pollution?  
(A) Further attempts to reduce emissions from gasoline -fueled vehicles will not 
help lower urban air -pollution levels.  
(B) Attempts to reduce the p ollutants that an individual gasoline -fueled vehicle 
emits have been largely unsuccessful.  
(C) Few serious attempts have been made to reduce the amount of pollutants 
emitted by gasoline -fueled vehicles.  
(D) Pollutants emitted by gasoline -fueled vehicles ar e not the most critical source 
of urban air pollution.  
(E) Reductions in pollutants emitted by individual vehicles have been offset by 
increases in pollution from sources other than gasoline -fueled vehicles.  
20. which of the following most closely parallels the situation described in the first 
sentence of the passage?  
(A) Although a town reduces its public  services in order to avoid a tax in crease, 
the town s tax rate exceeds that of other towns in the surrounding area.  
(B) Although a state passes strict laws to limit the type of toxic material that can 
be disposed of in public landfills, illegal dumping continues to increase.  
(C) Although a town s citizens reduce their individual use of water, the town s 
water supplies continue to dwindle because of a steady increase in the total 
population of the town.  
(D) Although a country attempts to increase the sale of domestic goods by adding 
a tax to the price of imported goods, the sale of imported goods within the  GRE  563 
 country continues to increase.  
(E) Although a country reduces the speed limit on its national highw ays, the 
number of fatalities caused by automobile accidents continues to increase.  
21. The author describes  which of the following as the most appealing feature of 
methanol?  
(A) It is substantially less expensive than ethanol.  
(B) It could be provided to consumers through the existing motor fuel distribution 
system.  
(C) It has a higher energy content than other alternative fuels.  
(D) Its use would make design improvements in individual vehicles feasible.  
(E) Its use would substantially reduce ozone levels.  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that a vehicle specifically designed to use 
methanol for fuel would  
(A) be somewhat lighter in total body weight than a conventional vehicle fueled 
with gasoli ne 
(B) be more expensive to operate than a conventional vehicle fueled with gasoline  
(C) have a larger and more powerful engine than a conventional vehicle fueled 
with gasoline  
(D) have a larger and heavier fuel tank than a gasoline clone  vehicle fueled 
with methanol  
(E) average more miles per gallon than a gasoline clone  vehicle fueled with 
methanol  
23. It can be inferred that the author of the passage most likely regards the criticism 
of methanol in the last paragraph as  
(A) flawed because of the assumptions on  which it is based  
(B) inapplicable because of an inconsistency in the critics  arguments  
(C) misguided because of its exclusively technological focus  
(D) inaccurate because it ignores consumers  concerns  
(E) invalid because it reflects the personal bia s of the critics  
Paule Marshall s Brown Girl, Brownstones  (1959) was a landmark in the depiction of female 
characters in Black American literature. Marshall avoided the oppressed and tragic heroine in 
conflict with White society that had been typical of th e protest novels of the early twentieth 
century. Like her immediate predeces sors, Zora Neale Hurston and Gwendolyn Brooks, she 
focused her novel on an ordinary Black woman s search for identity within the context of a Black 
community. But Marshall extended  the analysis of Black female characters begun by Hurston 
and Brooks by depicting her heroine s development in terms of the relationship between her 
Barbadian American parents, and by exploring how male and female roles were defined by their 
immigrant cult ure, which in turn was influenced by the materialism of White America. By 
placing characters within a wider cultural context, Marshall attacked racial and sexual 564 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 stereotypes and paved the way for explorations of race , class, and gender in the novels of the  
1970s. 
24. The passage is primarily concerned  with 
(A) comparing the works of three Black  American authors  
(B) describing common themes in Black American literature  
(C) discussing an important work in Black American literature  
(D) providing insights abou t Black American literature in the early twentieth 
century  
(E) providing historical information about the writing of Black American novels 
in the second half the twentieth century  
25. According to the passage, Hurston, Brooks, and Marshall are alike in that they  
(A) did not examine the effects of White culture  on their characters  lives  
(B) were heavily influenced by the protest  novels of the early twentieth century  
(C) used Black communities as the settings for their novels  
(D) wrote primarily about the difficulties their characters encountered in White 
cultur e 
(E) wrote exclusively about female characters and the experiences of women  
26. The author s description of the way in  which Marshall depicts her heroine s 
development is most probably intended to  
(A) continue the discussion of similarities in the works  of Brooks, Hurston, and 
Marshall  
(B) describe the specific racial and sexual stereotypes that Marshall attacked  
(C) contrast the characters in Marshall s novels with those in later works  
(D) show how Marshall extends the portrayal of character initiated b y her 
predecessors  
(E) compare themes in Marshall s early work with themes in her later novels  
27. It can be inferred that the author of the passage would describe Brown Girl , 
Brownstones  as being  
(A) completely different from novels written before 1959  
(B) highly influe nced by novels written in the early twentieth century  
(C) similar to the protest novels that preceded it  
(D) important in the late 1950 s but dated today  
(E) an important influence on novels written in the 1970 s 
SECTION B 
Many philosophers disagree ove r the definition of morality, but most disputants fall into  
one of two categories : egocentrics, who define morality as the pursuit of self -fulfillment, and 
sociocentrics, who define morality as an individual s obligations to society. Where does the truth  GRE  565 
 lie? Fortunately, the stem of the word morality  provides some clues. The word mores  
originally referred to the customs of preliterate cultures. Mores, which embodied each culture s 
ideal principles for governing every citizen, were  developed in the belief that the foundation of 
a community lies in the cultivation of individual powers to be placed in service to the community. 
These mores were concerned with such skills as food -gathering and warfare as well as an 
individual s relation ships with others. Thus, I submit , morality  must be concerned with what is 
honored by the community at large . However, self -fulfillm ent is important to morality because 
unfulfilled citizens, no matter how virtuous, cannot perform the duties morality assigns them.  
17. The primary purpose of this passage  is to 
(A) summarize an argument  
(B) resolve a dispute  
(C) trace a word s origin  
(D) prove a hypothesis  
(E) initiate a debate  
18. According to the passage, mores in  preliterate cultures concerned such  skills as 
warfare and food -gathering because these skills were  
(A) characteristic of an individual s self-fulfillment  
(B) examples of a culture s tradition s 
(C) manifestations of an individual s ideals  
(D) demonstrations of an individual s contributions to the community  
(E) examples of a community s governing principles  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that  the author  would be most likely to  agree 
with which of the following statements regarding sociocentrics and  egocentrics?  
(A) The position of the sociocen trics is stronger than that of the egocentrics.  
(B) The positions of the egocentrics and sociocentrics are of equal merit.  
(C) There is no merit  in the position of the egocentrics.  
(D) Neither position contributes very much to an understanding of the definition 
of morality.  
(E) The dispute between the egocentrics and sociocentrics is based on trivial 
issues.  
20. With  which of the following statements  regarding the relationship between the  
individual and morality would the  author be most likely to agree?  
(A) Failure in soc ial obligations is the  price of success in individual endeavors.  
(B) The unfulfilled citizen cannot fulfill his moral obligations to the community.  
(C) Morality is unconcerned with conflicts among citizens.  
(D) The unfulfilled citizen is without virtue.  
(E) Wealth harms a citizen s moral standing in the community.  
(This passage was written in 197 5.) 566 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 The complications frequently accompanying diabetes, such as impairment of vision and of 
kidney function, are now thought to result from the lack of continuou s control of blood glucose 
concentrations. The healthy pancreas, in response to increases in blood glucose concentration, 
releases small quantities of insulin throughout the day and thereby maintains the concentration 
within physiological limits (normoglyc emia). But the diabetic generally receives only one large 
dose daily. The diabetic s blood glucose concentration can thus fluctuate greatly during the 
interval between doses, and it has been suggested that the complications result from the 
periods of high concentrations of blood glucose (hyperglycemia). Many investigators thus 
believe that restoration of normoglycemia might halt the progression of such complications and 
perhaps even reverse them.  
There are three primary techniques that have been investigate d for restoration of 
normoglycemia. They are:  transplantation of whole, healthy pancreases;  transplantation of 
islets of Langerhans, that portion of the pancreas that actually secretes insulin;  and 
implantation of artificial pancreases. There has, in fact,  been a great deal of success in the 
development of these techniques and each seems, on the whole, promising. Nonetheless, it will 
undoubtedly be many years before any one of them is accepted as a treatment for diabetes.  
To many people , the obvious approac h would seem to be simply to transplant pancreases 
from cadavers in the same manner that kidneys and other organs are routinely transplanted. 
That was the rationale in 1966 when the first recorded pancreas transplant was performed. 
Between 1966 and 1975, t here were forty -six pancreas transplants in forty -five other patients in 
the United States and five other countries. But only one of these  patients is still alive with a 
functioning graft, and surgeons have found that the procedure is not as simple as they  once 
thought.  
The surviving patient has required no insulin since the operation. Another patient survived 
638 days without requiring insulin. And one patient survived a transplantation for more than a 
year, but died when he chose not to take the immunosup pressive drugs. These results, though 
meager, suggest that the procedure has the potential for success.  
The rest of the patients, however, either rejected the transplant or died within a short 
period. There does not appear to be any technical problem with the procedure. Rather, most of 
the patients were already so severely debilitated by the complications of diabetes that they 
could not withstand the surgery and the immunosuppressive regimen required to prevent 
rejection. More than half of the patients, fur thermore, also required a kidney transplant. Most 
investigators now agree that the  simultaneous transplantation of both organs is too great a 
shock to the patient and greatly increases the total risk.  
21. Which of the following best states one of the main conclusions of the passage?  
(A) Although the techniques for pancreas transplants appear to be theoretically 
correct, there are problems that must be solved before the operation can be 
used as a treatment for diabetes.  
(B) Although the techniques for pancre as transplants are still being developed, the 
experimental results show that the operation will be a successful treatment 
for diabetes in the near future.  
(C) Although pancreas transplants are reliable, many diabetics a re reluctant to  GRE  567 
 undergo the operation  because of the side effects of immunosuppressive 
drugs.  
(D) Although pancreas transplants alone ar e not generally successful , the 
operation can be used in conjunction with other procedures to treat diabetes.  
(E) Although pancreas transplants have not b een successful in treating diabetes , 
research indicates that other procedures may soon be developed.  
22. According to the passage, widely spaced doses of insulin can cause.  
(A) reversal of normal kidney function  
(B) delay in the onset of diabetes  
(C) radic al changes in the concentration of blood glucose  
(D) restoration of norm oglycemia 
(E) marked variations in the islets of Langerhans  
23. According to the passage, a periodic high concentration of blood glucose in 
diabetics is a possible cause of  
(A) deterioration of the pancreas  
(B) damage to the eyes and kidneys  
(C) rejection of tra nsplanted organs  
(D) inadequate secretion of insulin  
(E) increased production of blood cells  
24. It can be inferred from the passage that one of the important contributing causes 
of the failure of most pancreas transplants has been the  
(A) reluctance of  patients to cooperate with physicians  
(B) imperfect techniques used in the operations  
(C) scarcity of immunosuppressive drugs  
(D) unavailability or healthy pancreases  
(E) weakened condition of the patients  
25. The author provides information that would  answer  which of the following 
questions?  
I. What is hyperglycemia?  
II. What is one cause of hyperglycemia?  
III. What are some of the organs that can be adversely affected by 
hyperglycemia?  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and III only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  568 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 26. On the basis of the information in the passage, which of the following can be 
inferred about the is lets of Langerhans?  
I. They are important for the normal control of blood glucose concentration.  
II. They can be transplanted independe ntly of other pancreatic cells.  
III. They regulate immunosuppressive reactions.  
(A) I only  
(B) III only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) I and III only  
(E) I, II, and III  
27. The passage suggests that the author considers the data concerning the success of 
pancreas transplants to be  
(A) invalid  
(B) indirect  
(C) inaccurate  
(D) insufficient  
(E) inappropriate  
SECTION C 
In February 1848 the people of P aris rose in revolt against the constitutional monarchy  of 
Louis-Philippe.  Despite the existence of excellent narrative accounts, the February Days, as this 
revolt is called, have been largely ignored by social historian s of the past two decades. For  each 
of the three other major insurrections in nineteenth -century Paris July 1830, June 1848, and 
May 1871 there exists at least a sketch of participants  backgrounds and an analysis,  more or 
less rigorous, of the reasons for  the occurrence of the uprisings. Only in the case of  the 
February Revolution do we lack a useful description of participants that might characterize it in 
the light of what social history has taught us about the process of revolutionary mobilization.  
Two reasons for this relative neglect seem obviou s. First, the insurrection of February has 
been overshadowed by that of June. The February Revolution overthrew a regime, to be sure, 
but met with so little resistance that it failed to generate any real sense of historical drama. Its 
successor, on the oth er hand, appeared to pit  key socioeconomic groups in a life -or-death 
struggle and was widely seen by contemporary observers as marking  a historical departure.  
Through their interpretations,  which exert a continuing influence on our understanding  of the 
revolutionary process,  the impact of the events of June has been magnified, while, as an 
unintended consequence, the significance of the February insurrection has been diminished. 
Second, like other successful  insurrections, the events of February failed to  generate the most 
desirable kinds of historical records. Although the  June insurrection of 1848 and the Paris 
Commune of 1871 would be considered watersheds of nineteenth -century French history by 
any standard, they also present the social historian with a signal advantage: these failed 
insurrections created a mass of  invaluable documentation as a by -produc t of authorities  efforts  GRE  569 
 to search out  and punish the rebels.  
Quite different is the outcome of successful ins urrections like those of July 1830 and 
February 1848. Experiences are retold, but participants typically resume their daily routines 
without ever recording their activities.  Those who played salient roles may become the objects 
of highly embellished verbal  accounts or in rare cases,  of celebratory articles in contemporary 
periodicals. And it is true that the publicly acknowledged leaders of an  uprising frequently write 
memoirs. However, such documents are likely to be highly unreliable, unrepresentative, an d 
unsystematically preserved, especially when compared to the detailed judicial dossiers 
prepared for everyone arrested following a failed insurrection.  As a consequence, it may prove 
difficult or impossible to  establish for a successful revolution a compr ehensive and trustworthy 
picture of those who participated,  or to answer even the most basic questions one might pose 
concerning the social origins of the insurgents.  
17. According to the passage, a useful description of participants  (lines 11 -12) 
exists  for which of the following insurrections of nineteenth -century France?  
I. The July Insurrection of 1830  
II. The February Revolution of 184 8 
III. The June insurrection of 1848  
IV . The May insurrection of 1871  
(A) I and III only  
(B) II and IV only  
(C) I, II , and III only  
(D) I, III, and IV only  
(E) II, III, and IV only  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that support for the objectives of the February 
Revolution was  
(A) negligible  
(B) misguided  
(C) fanatical  
(D) spontaneous  
(E) widespread  
19. Which of the following, best describes the organization of the second paragraph?  
(A) The thesis of the passage is stated and supporting evidence systematically 
presented.  
(B) Two views regarding the thesis presented in the fi rst paragraph are compared 
and contrasted.  
(C) Evidence refuting the thesis presented in the first paragraph is systematically 
presented.  
(D) The thesis presented in the first paragraph is systematically supported.  
(E) The thesis presented in the first paragraph is further defined and a conclusion 570 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 drawn.  
20. It can be inferred from the passage that the author considers which of the 
following essential for understanding a revolutionary mobilization?  
(A) A comprehensive theory of revolution that can be app lied to the major 
insurrections of the nineteenth century  
(B) Awareness of the events necessary for a revolution to be successful  
(C) Access to narratives and memoirs written by eyewitnesses of a given 
revolution  
(D) The historical perspective provided by the passage of a considerable amount 
of time  
(E) Knowledge of the socioeconomic backgrounds of a revolution s participants  
21. Which of the following can be inferred about the detailed judicial dossiers  
referred to in line 49?  
(A) Information containe d in the dossiers sheds  light on the social origins of a 
revolution s participants.  
(B) The dossiers closely resemble the narratives written by the revolution s 
leaders in their personal memoirs.  
(C) The information that such dossiers contain is untrustwor thy and 
unrepresentative of a revolution s participants.  
(D) Social historians prefer to avoid such dossiers whenever possible because 
they are excessively detailed.  
(E) The February Revolution of 1848 produced more of these dossiers than did 
the June  insurrection.  
22. Which of the following is the most logical objection  to the claim made in lines 
38-39? 
(A) The February Revolution of 1848 is much less significant than the July 
insurrection of 1830.  
(B) The backgrounds and motivations of participants in the July insurrection of 
1830 have been identified, however cursorily.  
(C) Even less is known about the July insurrection of 1830 than about the 
February Revolution of 1848.  
(D) Historical records made during the July insurrection of 1830 are less reliable 
than those made during the May insurrection of 1871.  
(E) The importance of the July insurrection of 1830 has been magnified at the 
expense of the significance of the February Revolution  of 1848. 
23. With  which of the following statements regarding revolution would the author 
most likely agree?  
(A) Revolu tionary mobilization requires a great deal of planning by people 
representing disaffected groups.   GRE  571 
 (B) The objectives of the February Revolution were more radical than those of 
the June insurrection.  
(C) The process of revolutionary mobilization varies grea tly from one revolution 
to the next.  
(D) Revolutions vary greatly in the usefulness of the historical records that they 
produce.  
(E) As knowledge of the February Revolution increases, chances are good that its 
importance will eventually eclipse that of the June insurrection.  
One advantage of breeding African bees with other bee types (Africanization) may be 
resistance to the par asitic mite Varroa jacobsoni, a major threat to modern beekeeping. In parts 
of Europe, this mite is devastating honeybees and killing many colonies despite preventive 
measures by beekeepers. But in Brazil Varroa jacobsoni has been present in Africanized be es 
since 1972 without the loss of a single colony,  even though beekeepers there undertook no 
preventive measures. The mites lay eggs within the brood cells of immature bees, and 
developing mites feed on the hemolymph (blood) of bee pupae. But fewer mites r eproduce in 
Africanized bees than in European bees. Some researchers point out that this resistance may be 
related to the Africanized worker bee s shorter development period,  which prevents some mites 
from reaching maturity. Recently the mite has become a serious problem in colonies of 
European bees in North America. Africanization of these bees may be the best safeguard 
against this parasite.  
24. The passage suggests that  which of  the following wa s true of the honeybee 
colonies described in line 4 -6? 
(A) T heir life expectancy, when free of  disease, was  shorter than that of  European 
bee colonies in  North America.  
(B) They were not Africaniz ed. 
(C) Their life cycle did not accommodate the feeding habits of  Varroa jac obsoni.  
(D) They responded well to measures  to control Varroa jacobsoni . 
(E) They were managed using methods that were more modern than those 
employed in Brazil.  
25. The author cites all of the following as  evidence that Africanized bees  resistance 
to Varroa jacobsoni  is superior to that of European bees EXCEPT:  
(A) Fewer Varroa jacobsoni  mites reproduce in Africanized bees.  
(B) Varroa jacobsoni is killing many bee colonies in Europe.  
(C) Beekeepers in Brazil have not used preventive measures to protect their 
colonies.  
(D) Brazilian bee colonies have endured Varroa jacobson i since 1972.  
(E) At least some European bee colonies have been saved by preventive 
measures.  
26. According to the passage, research suggests that one possible reason the 
Africanized bees in Brazil have successfully resisted Varroa jacobsoni  is that  572 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) the life cyc le of the Africanized bee may limit the Varroa jacobsoni mites 
opportunity to reach full development  
(B) the Africanized bees may have had an opportunity to develop a chemical 
resistance to Varroa jacobsoni  
(C) the location of bee colonies in Brazil may p rovide a natural deterrent to 
Varroa jacobsoni  
(D) Varroa jacobsoni  may be relatively new to Brazil and may not have had time 
to become widespread  
(E) beekeepers may have developed effective control techniques for Varroa 
jacobsoni  
27. The author s argument regarding the  resistance of  Africanized bees to  Varroa 
jacobsoni would be most  weakened  if which of the following were true?  
(A) The bees in B razil were resistant before being Africanized.  
(B) The number of bee colonies in North America n increased dramatically 
whereas the number in Brazil remained unchanged.  
(C) Mites found in European bees reproduce at a faster rate than mites of identical 
species found in the bees in Brazil.  
(D) Africanized bees retain many of the characteristics of European bees.  
(E) Bee colonies in Europe continue to produce greater quantities of honey than 
do those in Brazil.  
1993 10   
SECTION A  
National character is not formally  considered by social scientists in  discussing economic 
and social  development today. They believe  that people differ and that these differences should 
be taken into account  somehow, but they have as yet  discovered no way to include such 
variables in their formal models of  economic and social development. The  difficulty lies in the 
nature of the data t hat supposedly define different national characters. Anthropologists and 
others are on much firmer ground when they attempt to describe the cultural norms for a small 
homogeneous tribe or village than when they undertake the formidable task of discovering the 
norms that exist in a complex modern nation -state composed of many disparate groups. The 
situation is further complicated by the nature of judgments about character, since such 
judgments are overly dependent on impressions and since, furthermore, impressions are 
usually stated in qualitative terms, it is impossible to make a reliable comparison between the 
national characters of two countries.  
17. The author s main point in the  passage is that national character  
(A) is too elusi ve to merit attention by anthropologists and other social scientists  
(B) is of greater interest to social  scientists today than it has been in the past  
(C) is still too difficult to describe with the precision required by many social  GRE  573 
 scientists  
(D) has bec ome increasingly irrelevant because of the complexity of modern lif e 
(E) can be described more accurately by anthropologists than by other social 
scientists  
18. Given the information in the passage, which of the following is NOT true of 
modern nation -states?  
(A) They are complex.  
(B) They are heterogeneous.  
(C) They are of interest to social  scientists.  
(D) They lack cultural norms.  
(E) They differ from one another in terms of national character.  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that the social  scientists mentioned in lines 1 -7 
would agree with which of the following statements ? 
I. It is extremely difficult to create models that account for both economic and 
social development.  
II. Models of economic and social  development would be improved by t he 
inclusion of adequate descriptions of national character.  
III. It is important to supplement formal models of economic and social 
development  with qualitative impressions of national  character.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) III only  
(D) I and III only  
(E) II and III only  
20. Which of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A problem is presented and reasons for its existence are supplied.  
(B) A controversial view is presented and evidence for its validity is supplied.  
(C) A  hypothesis is presented and possible means of verifying it are suggested.  
(D) A recent development is described and then analyzed.  
(E) A dispute is summarized and one side defended.  
One of the simplest and best known kinds of crystal is the ionic salt,  of which a typical 
example is sodium chloride  or ordinary table salt . The fundamental components of an ionic salt 
are ions: atoms or molecules that have become electrically charged by gaining or los ing one or 
more electrons. In forming sodium chloride, for example, sodium atoms give up an electron 
(thereby becoming positively charged) and chlorine atoms gain an electron (thereby becoming 
negatively charged). The ions are attracted to one another by t heir opposite charges, and they 
stack together compactly, like tightly packed spheres.  
Recently, scientists at Michigan State University created a new kind of crystal called an 574 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 electride. In electrides, the anions (negative ions) are completely replaced by  electrons, which 
are trapped in naturally formed cavities within a framework of regularly stacked cations 
(positive ions). Electrides are the first examples of ionic salts in which all these anionic sites are 
occupied solely by electrons.  
Unlike other typ es of anions, anionic electrons do not behave as if they were simple 
charged spheres. In particular, because of their low mass and their tendency to interact with 
one another over great distances, they cannot be pinned down  to any one location. Instead, 
they wander close to and among the atoms lining the cavity and interact with electrons in 
nearby cavities, perhaps changing places with them.  
The properties of an electride depend largely on the distance between the cavities that 
hold trapped electrons. Wh en the trapped electrons are far apart, they do not interact strongly, 
and so behave somewhat like an array of isolated negative charges. When they are closer 
together, they begin to display properties associated with large ensembles of identical particles . 
When they are still closer, the ensemble properties dominate and the electrons delocalize : 
they are no longer tightly bound within individual cavities but are more or less free to pass 
through the spaces within the frame -work of positive ions.  
By synth esizing electrides from a variety of materials, one can vary the geometry of the 
anionic cavities and their relation to the surrounding cations. The resulting properties may 
make it possible for electrides to become a basis for economically useful new mate rials and 
devices. For instance, because the electrons in some electrides are very weakly bound, these 
crystals could be effective as photosensitive detectors, in which an impinging photon liberates 
an electron, resulting in a small electric current. The s ame weak binding could also make 
electrides useful in solar -energy converters and as cathodes in batteries. One obstacle is the 
tendency of electrides to decompose through reaction with air and water. Researchers are 
seeking ways to increase their stabilit y. 
21. The passage is primarily concerned with discussing  
(A) a way to isolate electrons  
(B) the characteristics of a new kind of crystal  
(C) the structure of an ionic salt  
(D) commercial uses for electrides  
(E) the properties of ions  
22. In the first p aragraph, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) introducing a variant on the standard atomic theory  
(B) describing how chlorine atoms can become negatively charged  
(C) describing some early research at Michigan State University  
(D) presenting the iden tifying properties of an electride  
(E) providing background for the technical discussion to follow  
23. It can be inferred from the passage  that the differences between the behavior of 
anionic electrons and normal anions result from which of the following features 
of electrons , as compar ed to normal anions?   GRE  575 
 I. The much lower mass of electrons  
II. The much greater tendency of electrons to interact with one another over 
large distances  
III. The much greater likelihood of electrons to remain trapped in naturally 
formed anionic cavities  
(A) I  only 
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) I and III only  
(E) II and III only  
24. According to the passage, the defining characteristic of an electri de is which of 
the following?  
(A) Its positive ions are of particularly low mass.  
(B) Its ions possess identical electrical charges.  
(C) It contains a framework of regularly stacked ions.  
(D) Its ions demonstrate strong mutual attraction.  
(E) Its negative ions consist solely of electrons.  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that anions behaving as simple charged 
spheres  (line 22) could be expected to  
(A) readily lose electrons and become positively charged  
(B) move freely in and out of their cavities  
(C) respond to photons by liberating electrons  
(D) stack with other anions to create a regular framework  
(E) remain fixed relative to their cations  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that an electride behaves most like a normal 
ionic crystal when the electride has which of the following features?  
(A) The anionic cavities are widely separated.  
(B) All of the trapped electrons are able to delocalize.  
(C) The trapped electrons are liberated by impinging photons.  
(D) The ions are tightly packed together.  
(E) Most of the cations have lost their electrical charge.  
27. With which of the following statements regarding electrides would the author 
most likely agree?  
(A) They have proven themselves to be of great commercial value.  
(B) Their future commercial value is promising but uncertain.  
(C) They are interesting but of no practical value.  
(D) They have commercial value mainly in solar -energy applications.  576 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) Their principal importance will lie in scientific research.  
SECTION B 
Typically the queen honey bee is mother to all the bees in a hive; after mating with several 
male drones from other colonies, she lays fertilized eggs that develop into all -female worker 
bees and lays unfertilized eggs that become all -male drones. When a queen dies, workers often 
lay unfertilized eggs that hatch into drones. Yet workers rarely reproduce while a queen reigns.  
According to natural selection  theory, a worker would enhance her fitness or ability to 
propagate her genes by hatching her own eggs in addition to or in place of the queen s. But a 
typical worker s fitness would be diminished if other workers  sons, who have less genetic 
material in common with the worker, supplanted the queen s sons (the worker s brothers). 
Researchers, testing the hypothesis that workers usually somehow block each other s attempts 
to reproduce, put unfertilized eggs laid by workers and by the queen into a hive. Other workers 
quickly devoured the workers  eggs while leaving the queen s eggs alone.  
17. The author refers to the experiment described in lines 16 -19 in order to  
(A) explain how worker bees are prevented from mating with drones  
(B) explain how wo rker bees hatch and nurture the queen s young  
(C) demonstrate the universality of natural selection  
(D) show that worker bees are capable of thwarting each other s attempts to 
reproduce  
(E) provide a model of daily life in a typical honeybee hive  
18. The inner workings in a honeybee hive that regulate reproduction, as they are 
described in the passage, are most similar to which of the following types of 
human societies?  
(A) A totalitarian society in which citizens  policing of each other s actions 
helps to maintain the status quo.  
(B) A pacifist state in which the individuals are strongly opposed to the use of 
violence or aggression to settle disputes.  
(C) A democratic society in which the voice of the majority rules.  
(D) A parliamentary society in whic h a few members, organized as a cabinet 
wield executive power.  
(E) An anarchic state in which order and stable social structures are lacking.  
19. The passage best supports which of the following inferences about the fitness of 
honeybees?  
(A) Reproductio n diminishes any individual honeybee s fitness.  
(B) An individual worker s fitness can be maintained without the individual 
herself reproducing.  
(C) A hierarchy of stronger and weaker individuals among the worker bees 
determines which individuals will repr oduce when a queen dies.   GRE  577 
 (D) While a queen reigns, the fitness of the worker bees is increased and that of 
the drones is diminished.  
(E) Fitness encourages worker bees to hatch honeybee eggs without regard for the 
relatedness of the young to the parent.  
20. The passage suggests which of the following about the eggs laid by worker bees?  
(A) One of the eggs hatches into the next que en. 
(B) The eggs are invariably destroyed by other worker bees.  
(C) Each work er tries to hide her eggs from the other worker bees.  
(D) The eggs hatch only if the worker has mated with a drone from another hive.  
(E) The eg gs are less likely to be harmed by other workers if the queen is dead.  
In the fields of Delano , Califo rnia, in 1965 , Luis Valdez started the Teatro Campesino 
(Farmworker s Theater), and with it initiated the renaissance of Mexican American theater. The 
Teatro Campesino had an  avowedly po litical purpose: to rally campesinos  (farmworkers) in 
support of the farm workers  strike then being organized by Cesar Chavez . Valdez  dramatic 
presentations, called actos, spoke to a  campesino  audience and addressed topics and themes 
directly related to the strike. Valdez  early actos were composed of a series of scenes about the 
strike experience acted by campesino  volunteers. His later actos were presented by a newly 
constituted professional company, still called the Teatro Campesino, and addressed such  
themes as the impact of the Vietnam War on Mexican Americans and the dangers of 
assimilation, themes relevant to urban Mexican Americans as well as to campesinos . All Valdez  
actos contained elements of song and dance , relied little on stage effects or pr ops, and featured 
the use of masks. These dramatic elements, along with an intensely social or political purpose 
and the use of a mixture of Spanish, English, and Mexican American dialects in the dialogues , 
which realistically capture the flavor of Mexican  American conversation, are still characteristic 
both of the acto and of most other forms of Mexican American theater  today.  
Innovative as it is, the acto owes much to the theater traditions o f other periods and 
regions. Like early  Spanish American religio us dramas, secular folk dramas, and the Mexican 
carpas  of a somewhat later period, actos are usually performed outdoors by traveling groups of 
players or by local theater groups. The improvised comic satire of the actos is often attributed 
to Valdez  study  of the Italian commedia  dell arte of the sixteenth century, although some 
critics see it as a direct  reflection of the comic and improvisational  qualities of the more 
contemporary and local carpas  of Mexican theater. The Italian influence is likely, what ever 
Valdez immediate source: the Mexican carpas  themselves are said to have originated from the 
theater pieces of a sixteenth -century Spanish writer inspired by encounters with Italian 
commedia dell  arte troupes on tour in Spain. The English -language the ater has provided 
elements as well: Valdez himself has acknowledged his debt to the agitprop socialist theater 
that appeared in the United States during the 1920 s and 1930 s. In particular, his actos contain 
the same assortment of semiallegorical characte rs and the same blend of music, chorus, and 
dialogue found in some of the agitprop pieces, as well as the same fierce spirit of social and 
political critique. Finally, many of Valdez  later theater pieces freely incorporate characters, plots 
and symbols dr awn from the indigenous myths and rituals of the pre -Hispanic peoples of Latin 
America. In fact, no other art form illustrates more clearly the depth and complexity of the 578 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Mexican American heritage itself than does the acto of Luis Valdez and the Teatro Ca mpesino.  
21. According to the passage, the original impetus behind the establishment of the 
Teatro Campesino was which of the following?  
(A) To help urban Mexican Americans understand the problems confronting 
striking campe sinos  in California  
(B) To promote an attitude of pride in the depth and richness of the Mexican 
American heritage among striking campesinos  
(C) To provide striking campesinos an opportunity to use their creative talents to 
express their political opinions  
(D) To allow its founder to express his personal support of the campesinos  strike 
effort  
(E) To mobilize campesinos  to support the farm workers  strike in California  
22. The author cites all of the following as probable influences on Valdez  
development of the acto EXCEPT the  
(A) theater of sixteenth -century Italy  
(B) carpas of Mexico  
(C) drama of classical Greece  
(D) English -language theater of the United States  
(E) myths and rituals of pre -Hispanic America  
23. The passage suggests that which of the following  was true of the later actos  of the 
Teatro Campesino?  
(A) They were more politi cally effective than were earlier actos . 
(B) They were presented primarily outdoors, whereas earlier actos  were presented 
inside theaters.  
(C) They used a greater mixture of dialects than did the earlier actos. 
(D) They addressed a broader audience than di d the earlier actos . 
(E) They differed from earlier actos  in that they contained fewer improvisational 
elements.  
24. Which of the following best describes the author s evaluation of the views of the 
critics cited in line s 36-39? 
(A) Their views, if correct, do not preclude  the existence of an Italian influence 
on the acto. 
(B) Their views are unlikely to be correct, given the differences existing between 
Mexican and Mexican American theater.  
(C) Their views concerning the Mexican carpa s are essentially correct, but they  
lack familiarity with the acto.  
(D) Their views are probably more correct than the views of those who have 
attributed the comic and improvisational elements of the acto to earlier 
sources.   GRE  579 
 (E) Their views betray a lack of familiarity with the commedia dell  arte. 
25. The passage suggests that which of the following explains the characteristic use 
of a mixture of Spanish, English , and Mexican American dialects in the works of 
Mexican Amer ican playwrights?  
(A) Mexican American playwrights wish to include in their works elements 
drawn from the traditions and history of pre -Hispanic America.  
(B) Mexican American playwrights try to guarantee that their works are fully 
understood by the broades t possible audience, including those who may 
speak only one language.  
(C) Such a linguistic mix faithfully reflects the linguistic diversity of Mexican 
American culture, and is easily understood by most Mexican Americans.  
(D) Many Mexican American playwrig hts are quite familiar with both the 
Spanish -language and the English -language theater traditions.  
(E) Many different languages are still spoken within the confines of the United 
States, although English is still the most common first language of its 
citizens.  
26. According to the passage, which of the following elements characteristic of the 
acto are also found in some agitprop theater pieces?  
(A) The use of masks  
(B) Comic improvisation  
(C) An outdoor setting  
(D) Minimal use of complex stage effects or  props  
(E) An assortment of semiallegorical char acters  
27. Which of the following, if true, most strengthens the author s argument 
concerning the debt of the acto to the theater traditions of other periods and 
regions?  
(A) Many popular forms of theater rely h eavily on improvisation.  
(B) Plays resembling the acto in structure were written in the 1970 s by West 
African playwrights who are interested in dramatizing the richness of their 
own cultures.  
(C) The use of masks has, at one time or another , been characteristic of the theater 
traditions of almost all cultures, even those most isolated from outside 
influences.  
(D) During a strike, it is common for union members to present musical skits 
dramatizing the values of solidarity and resistance.  
(E) Before 1965 Luis Valdez had attended many performances of traditional 
Mexican theater groups touring the western United States.  
1994 02   580 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 SECTION A  
Analyzing the physics of dance can add fundamentally to a dancer s skill. Although dancers 
seldom see themselves totally in physical terms as body mass moving through space under 
the influence of well -known forces and obeying physical laws neither can they afford to ignore 
the physics of movement. For example, no matter how much a dancer wishes to leap off  the 
floor and then start turning, the law of conservation of angular momentum absolutely prevents 
such a movement.  
Some movements involving primarily vertical or horizontal motions of the body as a whole, 
in which rotations can be ignored, can be studied using simple equations of linear motion in 
three dimensions. However, rotational motions require more complex approaches that involve 
analyses of the way the body s mass is distributed, the axes of rotation involved in different 
types of movement, and the sources of the forces that produce the rotational movement.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage  is to 
(A) initiate a debate over two approaches to analyzing a field of study  
(B) describe how one field of knowledge can be applied to another field  
(C) poi nt out the contradictions between two distinct theories  
(D) define and elaborate on an accepted scientific principle  
(E) discuss the application of a new theory within a new setting  
18. The author mentions all of the following as contributing to an unde rstanding of 
the physics of dance EXCEPT:  
(A) the law of conservation of angular momentum  
(B) analyses of the way in which the body s mass is distributed  
(C) equations of linear motion in three dimensions  
(D) analyses of the sources that produce rotational  motions  
(E) the technical terms for movements such as leaps and turns  
19. The author implies that dancers can become more skilled by doing which of the 
following?  
(A) Ignoring rotational movements  
(B) Understanding the forces that permit various movements  
(C) Solving simple linear equations  
(D) Learning the technical terms utilized by choreographers  
(E) Circumventing the law of conservation of angular momentum  
20. Analysis of which of the following would require the kind of complex approach 
described in line s 14-19? 
(A) A long leap across space  
(B) A short jump upward with a return to the same place  
(C) A sustained and controlled turn in place   GRE  581 
 (D) Short, rapid steps forward and then backward without turning  
(E) Quick sidesteps in a diagonal line  
Human rela tions have commanded people s attention from early times. The ways of people 
have been recorded in innumerable myths, folktales, novels, poems, plays, and popular or 
philosophical essays. Although the full significance of a human relationship may not be di rectly 
evident, the complexity of feelings and actions that can be understood at a glance is 
surprisingly great. For this reason psychology holds a unique position among the sciences. 
Intuitive  knowledge may be remarkably penetrating and can significantl y help us understand 
human behavior, whereas in the physical sciences such commonsense knowledge is relatively 
primitive. If we erased all knowledge of scientific physics from our modem word, not only would 
we not have cars and television sets, we might ev en find that the ordinary person was unable to 
cope with the fundamental mechanical problems of pulleys and levers. On the other hand if we 
removed all knowledge of scientific psychology from our world, problems in interpersonal 
relations might easily be c oped with and solved much as before. We would still know  how to 
avoid doing something asked of us and how to get someone to agree with us; we would still 
know  when someone was angry and when someone was pleased. One could even offer 
sensible explanatio ns for the whys of much of the self s behavior and feelings. In other words, 
the ordinary person has a great and profound understanding of the self and of other people 
which, though unformulated o r only vaguely conceived, enables one to interact with oth ers in 
more or less adaptive ways. Kohler , in referring to the lack of great discoveries in psychology as 
compared with physics, accounts for this by saying that people were acquainted with 
practically all territories of mental life a long time before the  founding of scientific psychology.  
Paradoxically, with all this natural, intuitive, commonsense capacity to grasp human 
relations, the science of human relations has been one of the last to develop. Different 
explanations of this paradox have been sugges ted. One is that science would destroy the vain 
and pleasing illusions people have about themselves; but we might ask why people have always 
loved to read pessimistic, debunking writings, from Ecclesiastes  to Freud. It has also been 
proposed that just because we know so much about people intuitively, there has been less 
incentive for studying them scientifically; why should one develop a theory, carry out systema tic 
observations, or make predictions about the obvious? In any case, the field of human relations, 
with its vast literary documentation but meager scientific treatment, is in great contrast to the 
field of physic in which there are relatively few nonscien tific books.  
21. According to the passage, it has been suggested that the science of human 
relations was slow to develop because  
(A) intuitive knowledge of human relations is derived from philosophy  
(B) early scientists were more interested in the physical  world  
(C) scientific studies of human relations appear to investigate the obvious  
(D) the scientific method is difficult to apply to the study of human relations  
(E) people generally seem to be more attracted to literary than to scientific 
writings about human relations  
22. The author s statement that Psychology holds a unique position among the 
sciences  (lines 8 -9) is supported by which of the following clai ms in the 582 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 passage?  
(A) The full meaning of a human relationship may not be obvious.  
(B) Commonsense understanding of human relations can be incisive.  
(C) Intuitive knowledge in the physical sciences is relatively advanced.  
(D) Subjective bias is difficult to control in psychological research.  
(E) Psychological facts are too imprecise to lead to great discoveries.  
23. According to the passage, an understanding of the self can be  
(A) highly biased due to unconscious factors  
(B) profound even when vaguely conceived  
(C) improved by specialized training  
(D) irrelevant for understanding human relations  
(E) more reliable than knowledge about other people  
24. It can be inferred that the author would most likely agree with which of the 
following statements regarding people who lived before the adv ent of scientific 
psychology?  
(A) Their understanding of human relations was quite limited.  
(B) They were uninterested in acquiring knowledge of the physical world.  
(C) They misunderstood others more frequently than do people today.  
(D) Their intuitions ab out human relations were reasonably sophisticated.  
(E) They were more likely to hold pleasing illusions about themselves than are 
people today.  
25. The author implies that attempts to treat human relations scientifically have thus 
far been relatively  
(A) unilluminating  
(B) paradoxical  
(C) pessimistic  
(D) encouraging  
(E) uninterpretable  
26. The author refers to people who are attracted to pessimistic, debunking writings  
(line 44)  in order to support which of the following ideas?  
(A) Interesting books about human relations are typically pessimistic.  
(B) People tend to ignore scientific explanations of human relations.  
(C) People rarely hold pleasing illusions about themselves.  
(D) A scientific approach human relations would undermine the pleasing illusions 
people hold of themselves.  
(E) It is doubt ful that the science of human relations developed slowly because of 
a desire to maintain pleasing illusions.   GRE  583 
 27. It can be inferred that the author assumes that commonsense knowledge of human 
relations is  
(A) equally well developed among all adults within a given society  
(B) considerably more accurate in some societies than in others  
(C) biased insofar as it is based on myths and folktales  
(D) typically unrelated to an individual s interactions with other people  
(E) usually sufficiently accurate to facilitate interactions with others  
SECTION B 
Although a historical lack of access to  formal Spanish -language education  initially limited 
the opportunities of some Chicanos to hone their skills as  writers of Spanish , their bilingual  
culture clearly fostered an exuberant  and compelling oral tradition. It has  thus generally been 
by way of the  emphasis on oral literary creativity  that these Chicano writers, whose  
English -language works are sometimes uninspired, develope d the powerful and  arresting 
language that characterized  their Spanish -language works. This Spanish -English difference is 
not surprising. When writing in Spanish, these authors stayed close to the spoken traditions of 
their communities where  publication, s upport, and instructive  response would come quickly in 
local or regional newspapers. Works in English, however, often required the elimination  of 
nuance or colloquialism, the adoption of a formal tone, and the  adjustment of themes or ideas 
to satisfy the d ifferent demands of  national publications.  
17. The passage is primarily concerned  with doing which of the following?  
(A) Debating the historical value of a  literary movement  
(B) Describing and accounting for a difference in literary styles  
(C) Explaining a  publishing decision and evaluating its results  
(D) Analyzing the expectations of a particular group of readers  
(E) Classifying several kinds of literary production  
18. According to the author, the Chicano oral  experience contributed directly to  
which o f the following characteristics  in the work of some Chicano writers?  
(A) A sensitivity to and adeptness in using the spoken language  
(B) A tendency to appear in national rather than regional publications  
(C) A style reflecting the influence of Spanish lang uage education  
(D) A reliance on a rather formal style  
(E) A capacity to appeal to a broad range of audiences  
19. Which of the following best describes the function of the last two sentences of the 
passage (lines 11 -19)? 
(A) They expan d on an advantage mentioned in the first sentence of the 
passage(lines 1 -5). 
(B) They outline the consequences of a limitation discussed in the first sentence 
of the passage  (lines 1 -5). 584 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) They provide explicit examples drawn from the oral and the written works 
mentioned in the second sentence of the  passage (lines 5 -10). 
(D) They explain the causes of a phenomenon mentioned in the third sentence of 
the passage (lines 10 -11). 
(E) They limit the applicability of a generalization made in the third sentence of 
the passage  (lines 10 -11). 
20. The passage suggests that which of the following was probably characteristic of 
the national publications  mentioned in line 19? 
(A) They  primarily presented scholarly material of little interest to a general  
audience.  
(B) They sometimes published articles treating controversial themes.  
(C) They encouraged authors to feature local issues in articles in order to increase 
circulation.  
(D) The y included a significant number of articles by minority authors.  
(E) They took a stylistically formal approach to material of interest to a general 
audience.  
The two claws of the mature American  lobster are decidedly different from each other. The 
crusher claw is short and stout; the cutter claw is long and slender.  Such bilateral asymmetry, in 
which the right side of the body is, in all other respects, a mirror image  of the left side, is not 
unlike handedness in humans. But where the majority of humans are right -handed, in lobsters 
the crusher claw appears with equal probability on either the right or left side of the body.  
Bilateral asymmetry of the claws comes about  gradually. In the juvenile fourth and fifth 
stages of development, the paired claws are symmetrical and cutterlike. Asymmetry begins to 
appear in the juvenile sixth stage of development, and the paired claws further diverge toward 
well-defined cutter and crusher claws during succeeding stages. An intriguing aspect of this 
development was discovered by Victor Emmel. He found that if one of the paired claws is 
removed during the fourth or fifth stage, the intact claw invariably becomes a crusher , while the 
regenerated claw becomes a cutter. Removal of a claw during a later juvenile stage or during 
adulthood, when asymmetry is present, does not alter the asymmetry; the intact and the 
regenerate claws retain their original structures.  
These observations indicate that the conditions that trigger differentiation must operate in 
a random manner wh en the paired claws are intact but in a nonrandom manner when one of 
the claws is lost. One possible explanation is that differential use of the claws determines their 
asymmetry. Perhaps the claw that is used more becomes the crusher. This would explain wh y, 
when one of the claws is missing during the fourth or fifth stage, the intact claw always 
becomes a crusher. With two intact claws, initial use of one claw might prompt the animal to 
use it more than  the other throughout the juvenile fourth and fifth st ages, causing it to become 
a crusher.  
To test this hypothesis, researchers raised lobsters in the juvenile fourth and fifth stages of 
development in a laboratory environment in which the lobsters could manipulate oyster chips. 
(Not coincidentally, at this stage of development lobsters typically change from a habitat where  GRE  585 
 they drift passively, to the ocean floor where they have the opportunity to be more active by 
burrowing in the substrate.) Under these conditions, the lobsters developed asymmetric claws, 
half with crusher claws on the left, and half with crusher claws on the right. In contrast, when 
juvenile lobsters were reared in a smooth tank without the oyster chips, the majority developed 
two cutter claws. This unusual configuration of symmetrical cut ter claws did not change when 
the lobsters were subsequently placed in a manipulatable environment or when they lost and 
regenerated one or both claws.  
21. The passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) drawing an analogy between asymmetry in lobsters and han dedness in 
humans  
(B) developing a method for predicting whether crusher claws in lobsters will 
appear on the left or right side  
(C) explaining differences between lobsters  crusher claws and cutter claws  
(D) discussing a possible explanation for the way b ilateral asymmetry is 
determined in lobsters  
(E) summarizing the stages of development of the lobster  
22. Each of t he following statements about the development of a lobster s crusher 
claw is supported by information in the passage EXCEPT:  
(A) It can be  stopped on one side and begun on the other after the juvenile sixth 
stage.  
(B) It occurs gradually over a number of stages.  
(C) It is initially apparent in the juvenile sixth stage.  
(D) It can occur even when a prospective crusher claw is removed in the j uvenile 
sixth stage.  
(E) It is less likely in the absence of a manipulatable environment.  
23. Which of t he following experimental results, if observed, would most clearly 
contradict the findings of Victor Emmel?  
(A) A left cutterlike claw is removed in the fifth stage and a crusher claw 
develops on the right side.  
(B) A left cutterlike claw is removed in the fourth stage and a crusher claw 
develops on the left side.  
(C) A left cutterlike claw is removed in the sixth stage and a crusher claw 
develops on the right side.  
(D) B oth cutterlike claws are removed in the fifth stage and a crusher claw 
develops on the left side.  
(E) Both cutterlike claws are removed in the fourth stage and a crusher claw  
develops on the right side.  
24. It can be inferred that of the two laboratory environments mentioned in the 
passage, the one with oyster chips was designed to  586 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) prove that t he presence of oyster chips was not necessary for the development 
of a crusher claw  
(B) prove that the relative length of time that the lobsters were exposed to the 
oyster -chip environment had little impact on the development of a crusher 
claw  
(C) eliminat e the environment as a possible influence in the development of a 
crusher claw  
(D) control on which side the crusher claw develops  
(E) simulate the conditions that lobsters encounter in their natural environment  
25. It can be inferred from the passage  that one difference between lobsters in the 
earlier stages of development and those in the juvenile fourth and fifth  stages is 
that lobsters in the early stages are  
(A) likely to be less active  
(B) likely to be less symmetrical  
(C) more likely to lose a claw  
(D) more likely to replace a crusher claw with a cutter claw  
(E) more likely to regenerate a lost claw  
26. Which of the follo wing conditions does the passage suggest is a possible cause 
for the failure of a lobster to develop a crusher claw?  
(A) The loss of a claw during the third or earlier stage of development  
(B) The loss of a claw during the fourth or fifth stage of developm ent 
(C) The loss of a claw during the sixth stage of development  
(D) Development in an environment devoid of material that can be manipulated  
(E) Development in an environment  that changes frequently throughout the stages 
of development  
27. The author regards the idea that differentiation is triggered randomly when paired 
claws remain intact as  
(A) irrefutable considering the authoritative n ature of Emmel s observations  
(B) likely in view of  present evidence  
(C) contradictory to conventional thinking on lobster -claw differentiation  
(D) purely speculative because it is based on scattered research and 
experimentation  
(E) unlikely because of apparent inconsistencies with theories on handedness in 
humans  
1994 04   
SECTION A   GRE  587 
 Defenders of special protective labor legislation for women often maintain that eliminating 
such laws would destroy the fruits of a century -long st ruggle for the protection of women 
workers. Even a brief examination of the historic practice of courts and employers would show 
that the fruit of such laws has been bitter: they are, in practice , more of a curse than a ble ssing.  
Sex-defined protective laws have often been based on stereotypical assumptions 
concerning women s needs and abilities , and employers have frequently used them as legal 
excuses for discriminating against women. After the Second World War, for example , 
businesses and government sought to persuade women to vacate jobs in factories, thus making 
room in the labor force for returning veterans. The revival or passage of state laws limiting the 
daily or weekly work hours of women conveniently accomplished th is. Employers had only to 
declare that overtime hours were a necessary condition of employment or promotion in their 
factory, and women could be quite legally fired, refused jobs, or kept at low wage levels, all in 
the name of  protecting  their health. By validating such laws when they are challenged by 
lawsuits, the courts have colluded over the years in establishing different, less advantageous 
employment terms for women than for men, thus reducing women s competitiveness on  the job 
market. At the same time, even the most well -intentioned lawmakers, courts, and employers 
have often been blind to the real needs of women. The lawmakers and the courts continue to 
permit employers to offer employee health insurance plans that cov er all known human medical 
disabilities except those relating to pregnancy and childbirth.  
Finally, labor laws protecting only special groups are often ineffective at protecting the 
workers who are actually in the workplace. Some chemicals, for example, po se reproductive 
risks for women of childbearing years; manufacturers using the chemicals comply with laws 
protecting women against these hazards by refusing to hire them. Thus the sex -defined 
legislation protects the hypothetical female worker, but has no effect whatever on the safety of 
any actual employee. The health risks to male employees in such industries cannot be 
negligible, since chemicals toxic enough to cause birth defects in fetuses or sterility in women 
are presumably harmful to the human metab olism. Protective laws aimed at changing 
production materials or techniques in order to reduce such hazards would benefit all employees 
without discriminating against any.  
In sum, protective labor laws for women are discriminatory and do not meet their int ended 
purpose. Legislators should recognize that women are in the work force to stay, and that their 
needsgood health care, a decent wage, and a safe workplace are the needs of all workers . 
Laws that ignore these facts violate women s rights for equal pro tection in employment.  
17. According to the author, which of the following resulted from the passage or 
revival of state laws limiting the work hours of women workers?  
(A) Women workers were compelled to leave their jobs in factories.  
(B) Many employers ha d difficulty in providing jobs for returning veterans.  
(C) Many employers found it hard to attract women workers.  
(D) The health of most women factory workers improved.  
(E) Employment practices that addressed the real needs of women workers 
became commo n. 
18. The author places the word protecting  in quotation marks in line 21 most likely 588 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 in order to suggest that  
(A) she is quoting the actual wording of the laws in question  
(B) the protective nature of the laws in question should not be overlooked  
(C) p rotecting the health of workers is important to those who support protective 
labor laws  
(D) the laws in question were really used to the detriment of women workers, 
despite being overtly protective in intent  
(E) the health of workers is not in need of  protection, even in jobs where many 
hours of overtime work are required  
19. The passage suggests that which of the following is a shortcoming of protective 
labor laws that single out  a particular group of workers for protection?  
(A) Such laws are often too weak to be effective at protecting the group in 
question.  
(B) Such laws are usually drafted by legislators who, do not have the best 
interests of workers at heart.  
(C) Such laws exert no pressure on employers to eliminate hazards in the 
workplace.  
(D) Compliance with such laws is often costly for employers and provokes 
lawsuits by employees claiming discrimination.  
(E) Employer compliance with such laws results in increase d tension among 
workers on the job, because such laws unfairly privilege one group of 
employees over another.  
20. According to the first paragraph of the passage, the author considers which of the 
following to be most helpful in determining the value of sp ecial protective labor 
legislation for women?  
(A) A comparative study of patterns of work -related illnesses in states that had 
such laws and in states that did not  
(B) An estimate of how many women workers are in favor of such laws  
(C) An analysis of the c ost to employers of complying with such laws  
(D) A consideration of what intentions the advocates of such laws really had 
concerning women workers  
(E) An examination of the actual effects that such laws have had in the past on 
women workers  
21. The main  point of the passage is that special protective labor laws for women 
workers are  
(A) unnecessary because most workers are well protected by existing labor laws  
(B) harmful to the economic interests of women workers while offering them 
little or no actual protection  
(C) not worth preserving even though they do represent a hard -won legacy of the  GRE  589 
 labor movement  
(D) controversial because male workers receive less protection than they require  
(E) inadequate in that they often do not prevent employers from exposing women 
workers to many health hazards  
22. The author implies that which of the following is characteristic of many 
employee health insurance plans?  
(A) They cover all the common me dical conditions affecting men, but only some 
of those affecting women.  
(B) They lack the special provisions for women workers that proposed special 
labor laws for women would provide.  
(C) They pay the medical costs associated with pregnancy and childbirth  only for 
the spouses of  male employees, not for female employees.  
(D) They meet minimum legal requirements, but do not adequately safeguard the 
health of either male or female employees.  
(E) They have recently been improved as a result of the passage of new labor 
laws, but continue to exclude coverage of certain uncommon medical 
conditions affecting women.  
23. According to the passage, special labor laws protecting women workers tend 
generally to have which of the following effects?  
(A) They tend to modify the stereotypes employees often hold concerning 
women.  
(B) They increase the advantage to employers of hiring men instead of women, 
making it less likely that women will be hired.  
(C) They decrease the likelihood that employers will offer more protection to 
women workers than that which is absolutely required by law.  
(D) They increase the tendency of employers to deny health insurance and 
disability plans to women workers.  
(E) They have little impact of any kind on women workers, since typically very 
few women are employed in those classes of jobs covered by the laws.  
While it is true that living organisms are profoundly affected by their environment, it is 
equally impor tant to remember that many organisms are also capable of altering their habitat 
significantly, sometimes limiting their own growth. The influence of the biological component of 
an ecosystem is often greater in fresh waters that in marine or terrestrial sys tems, because of 
the small size of many freshwater bodies. Many of the important effects of organisms are 
related to their physiology, especially growth and respiration. By their growth many species can 
deplete essential nutrients within the system , thus limiting their own growth or that of other 
species. Lund has demonstrated that in Lake Windermere the alga Asterionella  is unable to 
grow in conditions that it itself has created. Once a year, in the spring, this plant starts to grow 
rapidly in the lake, us ing up so much silica from the water that by late spring there is no longer 
enough to maintain its own growth. The population decreases dramatically as a result.  590 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 24. Which of the following is an example  of the type of organism described  in lines 
2-5? 
(A) A  kind of ant that feeds on the  sweet juice exuded by the twigs of a  species of 
thorn tree that grows in dry  areas.  
(B) A kind of fish that, after growing  to maturity in the ocean, returns to fresh 
water.  
(C) A kind of flower that has markings distinctly pe rceptible in ultraviolet light to 
the species of bee that pollinates the flower.  
(D) A kind of tree with seeds that  germinate readily only in a sunny spot  and then 
develop into mature trees that  shade the area below them.  
(E) A kind of butterfly, itself nonpoisonous, with the same markings as a kind of 
butterfly that birds refuse to eat because it is poisonous.  
25. It can be inferred from the passage  that which of the followings is true  about 
Asterionella  plants in Lake  Windermere?  
(A) They are not present except in early spring.  
(B) They contribute silica to the waters as they grow.  
(C) They are food for other organisms.  
(D) They form a silica -rich layer on the lake bottom.  
(E) Their growth peaks in the spring.  
26. The passage indicates that organisms frequently have the strongest effects on 
their environment in  
(A) oceans, since oceans contain the largest organisms living on Earth  
(B) oceans, since oceans provide habitats for many different kinds of species  
(C) fresh water bodies , since such effects become pronounced in relatively small 
spaces  
(D) freshwater lakes, since nutrients in freshwater lakes are present only in small 
amounts  
(E) land areas, since there exist major  influences of climate on the kinds of  small 
organisms supported in land areas  
27. The primary topic of the passage is  the way in which  
(A) organisms are affected by the amount of nutrients available  
(B) organisms  can change their own surroundings  
(C) elements of freshwater habitats impede the growth of small organisms  
(D) the reproduction of organisms is controlled by factors in the environment  
(E) plant matter in a given locale can increase up to a limit  
SECTI ON B 
It is their sensitive response to human circumstance that accounts for the persistence of  GRE  591 
 certain universal ideas. Rabbi Meir, a second -century scholar, admonished his disciples to look 
not at the pitcher but at its contents because, he stated, Many a new pitcher has been found to 
be full of old wine.  This was his way of emphasizing the importance of the distinction between 
form and idea , and of stressing that the integrity of an idea is more important than the form of 
its expression.  
Creative ideas not only produce their own instruments of survival as time and 
circumstances demand, but permit the substitution of new forms for old under the pressure of 
changed circumstances. For example democracy, as an idea, originated in ancient Greece and 
was carri ed from there to Western Europe and the Americas. But it did not retain the ancient 
Greek form: it passed through several reforming processes and exists today in many countries. 
Democratic governments differ in form because democracy is in principle dynami c and has 
therefore responded to local needs.  
17. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) illustrating the importance of a historical figure  
(B) discussing an important characteristic of human ideas  
(C) describing the history of the growth of democracy  
(D) contrasting ancient and modern views of the importance of creative ideas  
(E) evaluating the contribution of ancient Greece to modern government  
18. According to the passage, democracy is an example of  
(A) a human circumstance that has molded creative ideas  
(B) an instrument of survival that has altered its original form  
(C) an attribute of a creative idea that has allowed that idea to persist  
(D) a creative idea that has persisted because of its adaptability  
(E) a reforming process that has culminated in the creation of modern 
governments  
19. The new pitcher  mentioned i n line 6 is the equivalent of which of the following 
elements in the author s discussion of democracy (lines 15-22)? 
(A) Ancient Greece  
(B) The idea of democracy  
(C) A modern democratic government  
(D) A dynamic principle  
(E) The Greek form of democracy  
20. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would disagree  most with 
which of the following assertions?  
(A) Changing circumstances sometimes give rise to original ideas.  
(B) Creative ideas have universal applications.  
(C) Changing human needs i nfluence universal ideas.  
(D) Democratic institutions are appropriate in the modern world.  592 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) An idea must be expressed in a traditional way.  
Before 1965 many scientists pictured the circulation of the ocean s water mass as 
consisting of large, slow -moving currents, such as the Gulf Stream . That view, based on 100  
years of observations made around the globe, produced only a rough approximation of the true 
circulation. But in the 1950 s and the 1960 s, researchers began to employ newly developed 
techniques and equipment, including subsurface floats that move with oc ean currents and emit 
identification signals, and ocean -current meters that record data for months at fixed locations in 
the ocean. These instruments disclosed an unexpected level of variability in the deep ocean. 
Rather than being characterized by smooth,  large-scale currents that change seasonally (if at 
all), the seas are dominated by what oceanographers call mesoscale fields: fluctuating, 
energetic flows whose velocity can reach ten times the mean velocity of the major currents.  
Mesoscale phenomena the oceanic analogue of weather systems often extend to 
distances of 100 kilometers and persist for 100 days (weather systems generally extend about 
1,000 kilometers and last 3 to 5 days in any given area). More than 90 percent of the kinetic 
energy of the ent ire ocean may be accounted for by mesoscale  variability rather than by 
large-scale currents. Mesoscale phenomena may, in fact, play a significant role in oceanic 
mixing, air -sea interactions, and occasional but far -reaching climatic events such as El Nino,  
the atmospheric -oceanic disturbance in the equatorial Pacific that af fects global weather 
patterns.  
Unfortunately, it is not feasible to use conventional techniques to measure mesoscale fields. 
To measure them properly , monitoring equipment would have to be laid out on a grid at 
intervals of at most 50 kilometers, with sensors at each grid point lowered deep in the ocean 
and kept there for many months. Because using these techniques would be prohibitively 
expensive and time -consuming, it was proposed in 19 79 that tomography  be adapted to 
measuring the physical properties of the ocean. In medical tomography x -rays map the human 
bodys density variations (and hence internal organs); the information from the x -rays, 
transmitted through the body along many different pa ths, is recombined to form 
three-dimensional images of the body s interior. It is primarily this multiplicative increase in data 
obtained from the multipath transmission  of signals that accounts for oceanographers  
attraction  to tomography: it allows the measurement of vast areas with relatively few 
instruments. Researchers reasoned that low -frequency sound waves, because they are so well 
described mathematically and because even small perturbations in emitted sound waves can be 
detected, could be transmitted through the ocean over many different paths and that the 
properties of the ocean s interior its temperature, salinity, density, and speed of currents 
could be deduced on the basis of how the ocean altered the signals. Thei r initial trials were 
highly successful, and ocean acoustic tomography was born.  
21. According to the passage, scientists are able to use ocean acoustic tomography to 
deduce the properties of the ocean s interior in part because  
(A) low -frequency sound wav es are well described mathematically  
(B) mesoscale phenomena are so large as to be easily detectable  
(C) information from sound waves can be recombined more easily than 
information from x -rays  GRE  593 
 (D) tomography is better suited to measuring mesoscale phenomen a than to 
measuring small -scale systems  
(E) density variations in the ocean are mathematically predictable  
22. The passage suggests that medical tomography operates on the principle that  
(A) x -rays are superior to sound waves for producing three -dimensi onal images  
(B) sound waves are altered as they pass through regions of varying density  
(C) images of the body s interior can  be produced by analyzing a single x -ray 
transmission through the body  
(D) the varying densities within the human body allow x -rays to map the internal 
organs  
(E) information from x -rays and sound waves can be combined to produce a 
highly detailed image of the body s interior  
23. Which of the following is most similar to medical tomography as it is described 
in the passage?  
(A) The use of ocean -current meter s to determine the direction and velocity of the 
ocean s mesoscale fields  
(B) The use of earthquake shockwave data collected  at several different location s 
and combined to create a three -dimensional image of the Earth s interior  
(C) The use of a grid -point  sensory system to map global weather patterns  
(D) The use of subsurface floats to map large -scale circulation in the ocean  
(E) The use of computer technology to halt the progress of a particular disease 
within the human body s internal organs  
24. The author mentions El Nino (line 27) primarily in order to emphasize which of 
the following points?  
(A) The brief duration of w eather patterns  
(B) The variability of mesoscale phenomena  
(C) The difficulty of measuring the ocean s large -scale currents  
(D) The effectiveness of low -frequency sound waves in mapping the ocean  
(E) The possible impact of mesoscale fields on weather co nditions  
25. Which of the following best describes the organization of the third paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) A theory is proposed, considered, and then attended.  
(B) Opposing views are presented , elaborated, and then reconciled.  
(C) A problem is describe d, then a solution is discussed and its effectiveness is 
affirmed.  
(D) An argument is advanced, then refuted, and an alternative is suggested.  
(E) A hypothesis is presented, qualified, and then reaffirmed.  
26. The passage suggests that which of the following would be true if the ocean s 594 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 circulation consisted primarily of large, slow -moving currents?  
(A) The influence of mesoscale fields on gl obal weather patterns would remain 
the same.  
(B) Large -scale currents would exhibit more variability than is actually observed.  
(C) The majority of the ocean s kinetic energy would be derived from mesoscale 
fields.  
(D) Atmospheric -oceanic disturbances such  as El Nino would occur more often.  
(E) Conventional measuring techniques would be a feasible method of studying 
the physical properties of the ocean.  
27. Which of the following , if presented as the first sentence of a succeeding 
paragraph, would most logically continue the discussion pr esented in the 
passage?  
(A) Timekeeping in medical tomography must be precise because the changes in 
travel time caused by density fluctuations are slight.  
(B) To understand how ocean acoustic tomography works, it is necessary to know 
how sound travels in the ocean.  
(C) Ships are another possibility, but they would need to stop every 50 kilometers 
to lower measuring instruments.  
(D) These variations amount to only about 2 to 3 percent of the average speed of 
sound in water, which is about 1, 50 0 meters per second.  
(E) The device used in medical tomography emits a specially coded signal, easily 
distin guishable from background noise.  
1994 10   
SECTION A  
The Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, ratified in 1868, prohibits 
state governments  from denying citizens the equal protection of the laws.  Although precisely 
what the framers of the amendment meant by this equal protection clause remains unclear, all 
interpreters agree that the framers  immediate objective was to provide a constitutio nal warrant 
for the Civil Rights Act of 1866, which guaranteed the citizenship of all persons born in the 
United States and subject to  United States jurisdiction. This declaration, which was echoed in 
the text of the Fourteenth Amendment, was designed prim arily to counter the Supreme Court s 
ruling in Dred Scott v. Sandford  that Black people in the United States could be denied 
citizenship. The act was vetoed by President Andrew Johnson, who argued that the Thirteenth 
Amendment, which abolished slavery, did  not provide Congress with the authority to extend 
citizenship and equal protection to the freed slaves. Although Congress promptly overrode 
Johnson s veto, supporters of the act sought to ensure its constitutional foundations with the 
passage of the Fourt eenth Amendment.  
The broad language of the amendment strongly suggests that its framers were proposing  GRE  595 
 to write into the Constitution not a laundry list  of specific civil rights but a principle of equal 
citizenship that forbids organ ized society from treating any individual as a member of an inferior 
class. Yet for the first eight decades of the amendment s existence, the Supreme Court s 
interpretation of the amendment betrayed this ideal of equality. In the Civil Rights Cases  of 
1883, for example, the Court invented the state action  limitation, which asserts that private  
decisions by owners of public accommodations and other commercial businesses to segregate 
their facilities are insulated from the reach of the Fourteenth Amendmen ts guarantee of equal 
protection under the law.  
After the Second World War, a judicial climate more hospitable to equal protection claims 
culminated in the Supreme Court s ruling in Brown v. Board of Education  that racially 
segregated schools violated the  equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Two 
doctrines embraced by the Supreme Court during this period extended the amendment s reach. 
First, the Court required especially strict scrutiny of legislation that employed a suspect 
classification , meaning discrimination against a group on grounds that could be construed as 
racial. This doctrine has broadened the application of the Fourteenth Amendment to other, 
nonracial forms of discrimination, for while some justices have refused to find any le gislative 
classification other than race to be constitutionally disfavored, most have been receptive to 
arguments that at least some nonracial discriminations , sexual discrimination in particular, are 
suspect  and deserve this heightened scrutiny by the c ourts. Second, the Court relaxed the 
state action limitation on the Fourteenth Amendment , bringing new forms of private conduct 
within the amendment s reach.  
17. Which of the following best describes the main idea of the passage?  
(A) By presenting a list o f specific rights, framers of the Fourteenth Amendment 
were attempting to provide a constitutional basis for broad judicial 
protection of the principle of equal citizenship.  
(B) Only after the Supreme Court adopted the suspect classification approach to 
reviewing potentially discriminatory legislation was the applicability of the 
Fourteenth Amendment extended to include sexual discrimination.  
(C) Not until after the Second World War did the Supreme Court begin to 
interpret the Fourteenth Amendment in a mann er consistent with the 
principle of equal citizenship that it expresses.  
(D) Interpreters of the Fourteenth Amendment have yet to reach consensus with 
regard to what its framers meant by the equal protection clause.  
(E) Although the reluctance of judges to extend the reach of the Fourteen th 
Amendment to nonracial discrimination has  betrayed the principle of equal 
citizenship, the  Supreme Court s use of the state action limitation to insulate 
private activity from the amendment s reach has been more harmful.  
18. The passage suggests that the principal effect of the state action limitation was to  
(A) allow some discriminatory practices to continue unimpeded by the Fourteenth 
Amendment  
(B) influence the Supreme Court s ruling in Brown v, Board of Education  596 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) provide expanded guidelines describing prohibited actions  
(D) prohibit states from enacting laws that violated the intent of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1866  
(E) shift to state governments the responsibility for enforcement of laws 
prohibiting discriminatory practices  
19. The author s position regarding the intent of the framers of the Fourteenth 
Amendment would be most seriously undermined if which of the following were 
true?  
(A) The framers had anticipated state action limitations as they are described in 
the passage.  
(B) The framers had merely sought to prevent discriminatory acts by federal 
officials.  
(C) The framers were concerned that the Civil Rights Act of 1866 would be 
overturned by the Supreme Court.  
(D) The framers were aware that the phrase equal protection of the laws  had 
broad implications.  
(E) The framers believed that racial as well as non -racial forms of discrimination 
were unacceptable.  
20. According to the passage, the original proponents of the Fourteenth Amendment 
were primarily concerned with  
(A) detailing the rights afforded by t he principle of equal citizenship  
(B) providing support in the Constitution for equal protection for all citizens of 
the United States  
(C) closing a loophole that could be used to deny individuals the right to sue for 
enforcement of their civil rights  
(D) asserting that the civil rights protected by the Constitution included nonracial 
discrimination as well as racial discrimination  
(E) granting state governments broader discretion in interpreting the Civil Rights 
Act of 1866  
21. The author implies that the Fourteenth Amendment might not have been enacted 
if 
(A) Congress  authority with regard to legislating civil rights had not b een 
challenged  
(B) the framers had anticipated the Supreme Court s ruling in  Brown v. Board of 
Education  
(C) the framers had believed that it would be used in deciding cases of 
discrimination involving non -racial groups  
(D) most state governments had been willing to protect citizens  civil rights  
(E) its essential elements had not been implicit in the Thirteenth Amendment   GRE  597 
 22. According to the passage, which of the following most accurately indicates the 
sequence of the events listed below?  
I. Civil Rights Act of 1866  
II. Dred Scott v. Sandford  
III. Fourteenth Amendment  
IV . Veto by President Johnson  
(A) I, II, III, IV  
(B) I, IV , II, III  
(C) I, IV , III, II  
(D) II, I, IV , III  
(E) III, II, I, IV  
23. Which of the following can be inferred about the second of the two doctrines 
referred to in lines 39-41 of the passage?  
(A) It caused some justices to rule that all types of discrimination are prohibited 
by the Constitution.  
(B) It shifted the focus of the Supreme Court from racial to nonracial 
discrimination.  
(C) It narrowed the concern of the Supreme  Court to legislation that employed a 
suspect classification.  
(D) It caused legislators who were writing new legislation to reject language that 
could be construed as permitting racial discrimination.  
(E) It made it more difficult for commercial businesses to practice racial 
discrimination.  
The Earth s magnetic field is generated  as the molten iron of the Earth s outer  core revolves 
around its solid inner  core. When surges in the molten iron  occur, magnetic tempests are 
created. At the Earth s surface, these tempests  can be detected by changes in the  strength of 
the Earth s magnetic field. For reasons not fully understood , the field itself reverses periodically  
every million years or so. During the past million years, for instance, the  magnetic north pole 
has migrated between the Antarctic and the Arctic.  
Clearly, geophysicists who seek to  explain and forecast changes in the  field must 
understand what happens in  the outer core. Unlike mete orologists, however, they cannot rely 
on observations made in their own  lifetimes. Whereas atmospheric storms  arise in a matter of 
hours and last for  days, magnetic tempests develop over  decades and persist for centuries. 
Fortunately scientists have been  recording changes in the Earth s magnetic field for more than 
300 years.  
24. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) analyzing a complicated scientific  phenomenon and its impact on the Earth s 
surface features  
(B) describing a natural phe nomenon and  the challenges its study presents to  
researchers  598 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) discussing a scientific field of  research and the gaps in researchers  
methodological approaches to it  
(D) comparing two distinct fields of  physical science and the different  research 
methods  employed in each  
(E) proposing an explanation for a  geophysical phenomenon and an experiment  
that could help confirm that explanation  
25. The passage suggests which of the  following about surges in the Earth s outer 
core?  
(A) They occur cyclically ever y few  decades.  
(B) They can be predicted by changes in  the Earth s inner core.  
(C) They are detected through indirect  means.  
(D) They are linked to disturbances in  the Earth s atmosphere.  
(E) They last for periods of about 1  million years.  
26. It can be  inferred from the passage that  geophysicists seeking to explain  magnetic 
tempests ought to conduct  research on the Earth s outer core  because the Earth s 
outer core  
(A) is more fully understood than the  Earth s magnetic field  
(B) is more easily observed t han the  Earth s magnetic field  
(C) has been the subject of extensive  scientific observation for 300 years  
(D) is involved in generating the Earth s magnetic field  
(E) reflects changes in the inner core  caused by magnetic tempests  
27. In the second paragraph, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) sta ting a limitation that helps  determine a research methodology  
(B) making a comparative analysis of two  differe nt research methodologies  
(C) assessing the amount of empirical  data in the field of physical science  
(D) suggesting an optimistic way of  viewing a widely feared phenomenon  
(E) describing a fundamental issue and  discussing its future impact on society  
SECTION B 
The defoliation of millions of acres  of trees by massive infestations of  gypsy moth  
caterpillars is a recurring  phenomenon in the northeastern United  States. In studying these 
outbreaks, scientists have discovered that  affected t rees fight back by releasing  toxic chemicals, 
mainly phenols, into  their foliage. These noxious substances limit caterpillars  growth and 
reduce  the number of eggs that female moths  lay. Phenols also make the eggs  smaller, which 
reduces the growth of  the following year s caterpillars. Because the number of eggs a female  
moth produces is directly related to  her size, and because her size is determined entirely by her 
feeding success as  a caterpillar, the trees  defensive  mechanism has an impact on moth  
fecun dity.  GRE  599 
 The gypsy moth is also subject to  attack by the nucleopolyhedrosis  virus, or wilt disease , a 
particularly  important killer of the caterpillars in  outbreak years. Caterpillars contract  wilt 
disease when they eat a leaf to  which the  virus, encased in a protein  globule, has become 
attached. Once  ingested by a caterpillar, the protein globule dissolves, releasing thousands  of 
viruses, or virions, that after  about two weeks multiply enough to fill  the entire body cavity. 
When the  caterp illar dies, the virions are  released to the outside, encased in a  new protein 
globule synthesized from  the caterpillar s tissues and ready to  be picked up by other 
caterpillars.  
Knowing that phenols, including  tannins, often act by associating with  and alt ering the 
activity of proteins, researchers focused on the effects on  caterpillars of ingesting the virus and  
leaves together. They found that on  tannin -rich oak leaves, the virus is  considerably less 
effective at killing  caterpillars than when it is on as pen leaves, which are lower in phenols. In 
general, the more concentrated the phenols in tree leaves, the less deadly the virus. Thus, 
while highly  concentrated phenols in tree leaves  reduce the caterpillar population by  limiting 
the size of caterpillars a nd, consequently, the size of the female s egg cluster, these same 
chemicals also  help caterpillars survive by disabling the wilt virus. Forest stands of red  oaks, 
with their tannin -rich foliage, may even provide caterpillars with safe havens from disease.  In 
stands  dominated by trees such as aspen, however, incipient gypsy moth outbreaks  are quickly 
suppressed by viral epidemics.  
Further research has shown that caterpillars become virtually immune to the wilt virus as 
the trees on which they  feed respond t o increasing defoliation. The trees  own defenses raise 
the threshold of caterpillar vulnerability  to the disease, allowing populations to grow denser 
without becoming more susceptible to infection. For these reasons, the benefits to the 
caterpillars of in gesting phenols appear to outweigh the costs. Given the presence of the virus, 
the trees  defensive tactic apparently has  backfired . 
17. Which of the following statements best expresses the main point of the passage?  
(A) Recurring outbreaks of infestation by gypsy moth caterpillars have had a 
devastating impact on trees in the northeastern United States.  
(B) A mechanism used by trees to combat the threat from gypsy moth caterpillars 
has actua lly made some trees more vulnerable to that threat.  
(C) Although deadly to gypsy moth caterpillars, wilt disease has failed to 
significantly affect the population density of the caterpillars.  
(D) The tree species with the highest levels of phenols in their  foliage are the 
most successful in defending themselves against gypsy moth caterpillars.  
(E) In their efforts to develop new methods for controlling gypsy moth 
caterpillars, researchers have focused on the effects of phenols in tree leaves 
on the insec ts growth and reproduction.  
18. In lines 1 2-14, the phrase the trees  defensive mechanism has an impact on moth 
fecundity  refers to which of the following phenomena?  
(A) Female moths that ingest phenols are more susceptible to wilt virus, which 
causes t hem to lay smaller eggs.  600 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) Highly concentrated phenols in tree leaves limit caterpillars  food supply, 
thereby reducing the gypsy moth population.  
(C) Phenols attack the protein globule that protects moth egg clusters, making 
them vulnerable to  wilt viru s and lowering their survival rate.  
(D) Phenols in oak leaves drive gypsy moths into forest stands dominated by 
aspens, where they succumb to viral epidemics.  
(E) The consumption of phenols by caterpillars results in undersized female 
gypsy moths, which  tend to produce small egg clusters.  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that wilt disease virions depend for their 
survival on  
(A) protein synthesized from the tissues of a host caterpillar  
(B) aspen leaves with high concentrations of phenols  
(C) tann in-rich oak leaves  
(D) nutrients that they synthesize from gypsy moth egg clusters  
(E) a rising threshold of caterpillar vulnerability to wilt disease  
20. Which of the following, if true, would most clearly demonstrate the operation of 
the trees  defensive mechanism as it is described in the first paragraph of the 
passage?  
(A) Caterp illars feeding on red oaks that were more than 50 percent defoliated 
grew to be only two -thirds the size of those feeding on trees with relatively 
intact foliage.  
(B) Oak leaves in areas unaffected by gypsy moths were found to have higher 
levels of tannin on average than aspen leaves in areas infested with gypsy 
moths.  
(C) The survival rate of gypsy moth caterpillars exposed to the wilt virus was 40 
percent higher for those that fed on aspen leaves than for those that ate oak 
leaves.  
(D) Female gypsy moths produced an average of 25 percent fewer eggs in areas 
where the wilt virus flourished than did moths in areas that were free of the 
virus.  
(E) Gypsy moth egg clusters deposited on oak trees were found to have relatively 
large individual eggs compared to  those deposited on aspen trees.  
21. Which of the following best describes the function of the third paragraph of the 
passage?  
(A) It resolves a contradiction between the ideas presented in the first and second 
paragraphs.  
(B) It introduces research data t o support the theory outlined in the second 
paragraph.  
(C) It draws a conclusion from conflicting evidence presented in the first two 
paragraphs.   GRE  601 
 (D) It shows how phenomena described in the first and second paragraphs act in 
combination.  
(E) It elaborates on the thesis introduced in the first paragraph after a digression 
in the second paragraph.  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that gypsy moth caterpillars become immune 
to the wilt virus as a result of  
(A) consuming a wide range  of nutrients from a variety of leaf types  
(B) feeding on leaves that contain high levels of phenols  
(C) producing fewer offspring, which favors the survival of the hardiest 
individuals  
(D) ingesting the virus together with leaves that do not contain tanni n 
(E) growing population density, which outstrips the ability of the virus to multiply 
and spread  
23. Which of the following statements about gypsy moth caterpillars is supported by 
information presented in the passage?  
(A) Wilt disease is more likely to  strike small gypsy moth caterpillars than large 
ones.  
(B) The concentration of phenols in tree leaves increases as the gypsy moth 
caterpillar population dies off.  
(C) Female gypsy moth caterpillars stop growing after they ingest leaves 
containing phenols.  
(D) Differing concentrations of phenols in leaves have differing effects on the 
ability of the wilt virus to  kill gypsy moth caterpillars.  
(E) The longer a gypsy moth population is exposed to wilt disease, the greater the 
likelihood that the gypsy moth caterpillars will become immune to the virus.  
The sweep  of narrative in A. N. Wilson s biography of C. S. Lewis is impressive and  there is 
much that is acute and well argued. But much in this work is careless and  unworthy of its author. 
Wilson, a novelist and an accomplished biographer, has failed to do what any writer on such a 
subject as Lewis ought to do, namely work out  a coherent view of how the various literary 
works by the subject are to be described and commented on. Decisions have to be made on 
what to look at in detail and what to pass by  with just a mention. Wilson has not thought this 
problem out. For instance, Till We Have Faces , Lewis  treatment of the  Eros and Psyche story 
and one of his  best-executed and most moving works, is  merely mentioned by Wilson, though it  
illuminates Lewis  spiritual development, whereas Lewis  minor work Pilgrims Regress  is looked 
at in considerable detail.  
24. The author of the passage implies that Wilson s examination of Pilgrim s Regress  
(A) is not as coherent as his treatment of Till We Have Faces  
(B) would have been more appropriate in a  separate treatise because of the scope 
of Pilgrim s Regress  
(C) demonstrates how Wilson s narrow focus  ignores the general themes of 602 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Lewis  works  
(D) was more extensive than warranted because  of the relative unimportance of 
Pilgrim s Regress  
(E) was disproportionately lo ng relative to  the amount of effort Lewis devoted to 
writing  Pilgrim s Regress  
25. The author of the passage would be most likely to agree with which of the 
following statements regarding Till We Have Faces ? 
(A) It is an improvement over the Eros and Psych e story on which it is based.  
(B) It illustrated Lewis  attempt to involve  his readers emotionally in the story of 
Eros and Psyche.  
(C) It was more highly regarded by Wilson than  by Lewis himself.  
(D) It is one of the outstanding literary  achievements of L ewis career.  
(E) It is probably one of the most popular of  Lewis  works.  
26. Which of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) An evaluation is made, and aspects of the  evaluation are expanded on with 
supporting  evidence.  
(B) A  theory is proposed, and supporting  examples are provided.  
(C) A position is examined, analyzed, and  rejected.  
(D) A contradiction is described, then the  points of contention are evaluated and  
reconciled.  
(E) Opposing views are presented and  evaluated, then modifications are 
advocated.  
27. Which of the following best describes the content of the passage?  
(A) A critique of A. N. Wilson as a biographer  
(B) An evaluation of the significance of several works by C. S. Lewis  
(C) An appraisal of a biography by A. N. Wilson  
(D) A ranking of the elements necessary for a well -structured biography  
(E) A proposal for evaluating the literary merits of the works of C. S. Lewis  
1995 04   
SECTION A  
Influenced by the view of some twentieth -century feminists that women s position within 
the family is one of the central factors determining women s socia l position, some historians 
have underestimated the significance of the woman suffrage movement. These historians 
contend that nineteenth -century suffragist was less radical and, hence, less important than, for 
example, the moral reform movement or domesti c feminism two nineteenth -century 
movements in which women struggled for more power and autonomy within the family. True,  GRE  603 
 by emphasizing these struggles, such historians have broadened the conventional view of 
nineteenth -century feminism, but they do a his torical disservice to suffragism. 
Nineteenth -century feminists and anti -feminist alike perceived the suffragists  demand for 
enfranchisement as the most radical element in women s protest, in part because suffragists 
were demanding power that was not based  on the institution of the family, women s traditional 
sphere. When evaluating nineteenth -century feminism as a social force, contemporary 
historians should consider the perceptions of actual participants in the historical events.  
17. The author asserts th at the  historians discussed in the passage have  
(A) influenced feminist theorists who concentrate on the family  
(B) honored the perceptions of the women who participated in the women 
suffrage movement  
(C) treated feminism as a social force rather than as a n intellectual tradition  
(D) paid little attention to feminist movements  
(E) expanded the conventional view of nineteenth -century feminism  
18. The author of the passage asserts that some twentieth -century feminists have 
influenced some historians view of the  
(A) significance of the woman suffrage movement  
(B) importance to society of the family as an institution  
(C) degree to which feminism changed nineteenth -century society  
(D) philosophical traditions on which contemporary feminism is based  
(E) public response to domestic feminism in the nineteenth century  
19. The autho r of the passage suggests that which of the following was true of 
nineteenth -century feminists?  
(A) Those who participated in the mor al reform movement were motivated 
primarily by a desire to reconcile their private lives with the ir public 
positions.  
(B) T hose who advocated domestic feminism, although less visible than the 
suffragists, were in some ways the more radical of the two groups.  
(C) Those who participated in the woman suffrage movement sought social roles 
for women that were not defined by women s familial roles.  
(D) Those who advocated domestic feminism regarded the gaining of more 
autonomy within the family as a step toward more participation in public 
life. 
(E) Those who participated in the nineteenth -century moral reform movement 
stood midwa y between the positions of domestic feminism and suffragism.  
20. The author implies that which of the following is true of the historians discussed 
in the passage?  
(A) They argue that nineteenth -century feminism was not as significant a social 
force as twe ntieth -century feminism has been.  604 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) They rely too greatly on the perceptions of the actual participants in the 
events they study.  
(C) Their assessment of the relative success of nineteenth -century domestic 
feminism does not adequately take into account t he effects of antifeminist 
rhetoric.  
(D) Their assessment of the significance of nineteenth -century suffragism differs 
considerably from that of nineteenth -century feminists.  
(E) They devote too much attention to nineteenth -century suffragism at the 
expense of more radical movements that emerged shortly after the turn of the 
century.  
Many objects in daily use have clearly been influenced by science, but their form and 
function, their dimensions and appearance, were determined by technologists, artisans, 
designers, inventors, and engineers using non -scientific modes of thought. Many features and 
qualities of the objects that a technologist thinks about cannot be reduced to unambiguous 
verbal descriptions; they are dealt with in the mind by a visual, nonver bal process. In the 
development of Western technology, it has been non -verbal thinking, by and large, that has 
fixed the outlines and filled in the details of our material surroundings. Pyramids, cathedrals, 
and rockets exist not because of geometry or the rmodynamics, but because they were first a 
picture in the minds of those who built them.  
The creative shaping process of a technologist s mind can be seen in nearly every artifact 
that exists. For example, in designing a diesel engine , a technologist might impress individual 
ways of nonverbal thinking on the machine by continually using an intuitive sense of rightness 
and fitness. What would be the shape of the combustion chamber ? Where should the valves b e 
placed? Should it have a long or short piston? Such questions have a range of answers that are 
supplied by experience, by physical requirements, by limitations of available space, and not 
least by a sense of form. Some decisions, such as wall thickness a nd pin diameter, may depend 
on scientific calculations, but the nonscientific component of design remains primary.  
Design courses, then , should be an essential element in engineering curricula. Nonverbal 
thinking, a central mechanism in engineering design,  involves perceptions, the stock-in-trade of 
the artist, not the scientist. Because perceptive processes are not assumed to entail hard 
thinking,  nonverbal thought is sometimes seen as a primitive stage in the development of 
cognitive processes and inferior to verbal or mathematical thought. But it is paradoxical that 
when the staff of the Historic American Engineering Record  wished to have drawings made of 
machines and isometric views of industrial processes for its historica l record of American 
engineering, the only college students with the requisite abilities were not engineering students, 
but rather students attending architectural schools.  
If courses in design, which in a strongly analytical engineering curriculum provide  the 
background required for practical problem -solving, are not provided, we can expect to 
encounter silly but costly errors occurring in advanced engineering systems. For example, early 
models of high -speed railroad cars loaded with sophisticated controls  were unable to operate in 
a snowstorm because a fan sucked snow into the electrical system. Absurd random failures that 
plague automatic control systems are not merely trivial aberrations; they are a reflection of the 
chaos that results when design is ass umed to be primarily a problem in mathematics.   GRE  605 
 21. In the passage, the author is  primarily concerned with  
(A) identifying the kinds of thinking that are used by technologists  
(B) stressing the importance of nonverbal thinking in engineering design  
(C) prop osing a new role for nonscientific thinking in the development of 
technology  
(D) contrasting the goals of engineers with those of technologists  
(E) criticizing engineering schools for emphasizing science in engineering 
curricula  
22. It can be inferred that the author thinks engineering curricula are  
(A) strengthened when they include courses in design  
(B) weakened by the substitution of physic al science courses for courses designed 
to develop mathematical skills  
(C) strong because nonverbal thinking is still emphasized by most of the courses  
(D) strong despite the errors that graduates of such curricula have made in the 
development of automatic  control systems  
(E) strong despite the absence of nonscientific modes of thinking  
23. Which of the following statements best illustrates the main point of lines 1 -28 of 
the passage?  
(A) When a machine like a rotary engine malfunctions, it is the technologist who 
is best equipped to repair it.  
(B) Each component of an automobile for example, the engine or the fuel tank
has a shape that has been scientifically determined to be best suited to that 
component s function.  
(C) A telephone is a complex instrument designed by t echnologists using only 
nonverbal thought.  
(D) The designer of a new refrigerator should consider the designs of other 
refrigerators before deciding on its final form.  
(E) The distinctive features of a suspension bridge reflect its designer s 
conceptualization as well as the physical requirements of its site.  
24. Which of the following statements would best serve as an introduction to the 
passage?  
(A) The assumption that the knowledge incorporated in technological 
developments must be derived from science ignores the many non -scientific 
decisions made by technologists.  
(B) Analytical thought is no longer a vital component in the success of 
technological development . 
(C) As knowledge of technology has increased, the tendency has been to lose 
sight of the important role played by scientific thought in making decisions 
about form, arrangement, and texture.  606 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (D) A movement in engineering colleges toward a technician s degre e reflects a 
demand for graduates who have the nonverbal reasoning ability that was 
once common among engineers.  
(E) A technologist thinking about a machine, reasoning through the successive 
steps in a dynamic process, can actually turn the machine over  mentally.  
25. The author calls the predicament faced by the Historic American Engineering 
Record  paradoxical  (lines 36-37) most probably because  
(A) the publication needed drawings that its own staff could not make  
(B) architectural schools offered but did not require engineering design courses 
for their students  
(C) college students were qualified to make the drawings while practicing 
engineers were not  
(D) the drawings needed were so complicated that even students in architectural 
schools had difficult y making them  
(E) engineering students were not trained to make the type of drawings needed to 
record the development of their own discipline  
26. According to the passage, random failures in automatic control systems are not 
merely trivial aberrations  (lines  53) because  
(A) automatic control systems are designed by engineers who have little practical 
experience in the field  
(B) the failures are characteristic of systems designed by engineers relying too 
heavily on concepts in mathematics  
(C) the failur es occur too often to be taken lightly  
(D) designers of automatic control systems have too little training in the analysis 
of mechanical difficulties  
(E) designers of automatic control systems need more help from scientists who 
have a better understanding of the analytical problems to be solved before 
such systems can work efficiently  
27. The author uses the example of the early models of high -speed  railroad cars 
primarily to  
(A) weaken the argument that modern engineering system s have major defects 
because of an absence of design courses in engineering curricula  
(B) support the thesis that the number of errors in modern engineering systems is 
likely  to increase  
(C) illustrate the idea that courses in design are the most effective means for 
reducing the cost of designing engineering systems  
(D) support the contention that a lack of attention to the nonscientific aspects of 
design results in poor conce ptualization by engineers  
(E) weaken the proposition that mathematics is a necessary part of the study of 
design   GRE  607 
 SECTION B 
One explanation for the tendency of animals to be more vigilant in smaller groups than in 
larger ones assumes that the vigilant be haviorlooking up, for example is aimed at predators. 
If individuals on the  edge of a group are more vigilant because they are at greater risk of being 
captured, then individuals on average would have to be more vigilant in smaller groups, 
because the anim als on the periphery of a group form a greater proportion of the whole group 
as the size of the group diminishes.  
However, a different explanation is necessary in cases where the vigilant behavior is not 
directed at predators. J. Krebs has discovered that great blue herons look up more often when 
in smaller flocks than when in larger ones, solely as a consequence of poor feeding conditions. 
Krebs hypothesizes that the herons in smaller flocks are watching for herons that they might 
follow to better feeding pools, which usually attract larger numbers of  the birds.  
17. It can be inferred from the passage that in species in which vigilant behavior is 
directed at predators, the tendency of the animals to be more vigilant in smaller 
groups than in larger ones wou ld most likely be minimized if which of the 
following were true?  
(A) The vigilance of animals on the periphery of a group always exceeded that of 
animals located in its interior, even when predators were not in the area.  
(B) The risk of capture for individ uals in a group was the same, whether they 
were located in the interior of the group or on its periphery.  
(C) Animals on the periphery of a group tended to be less capable of defending 
themselves from attack by predators than animals located in the interio r of 
the group.  
(D) Animals on the periphery of a group tended to bear marks that were more 
distinctive to predators than animals located in the interior of the group.  
(E) Animals on the periphery of a group tended to have shorter life spans than 
animal s located in the interior of the group.  
18. Which of the following best describes the relationship of the second paragraph to 
the first?  
(A) The second paragraph relies on different evidence in drawing a conclusion 
similar to that expressed in the first pa ragraph.  
(B) The second paragraph provides further elaboration on why an assertion made 
at the end of the first paragraph proves to be true in most cases.  
(C) The second paragraph provides additional information in support of a 
hypothesis stated in the fir st paragraph.  
(D) The second paragraph provides an example of a case in which the assumption 
described in the first paragraph is unwarranted.  
(E) The second paragraph describes a phenomenon that has the same cause as the 
phenomenon described in the firs t paragraph.  608 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 19. It can be inferred from the passage  that the author of the passage would be most 
likely to agree with which of the following assertions about vigilant behavior?  
(A) The larger the group of animals, the higher the probability that individua ls in 
the interior of the group will exhibit vigilant behavior.  
(B) Vigilant behavior exhibited by individuals in small groups is more effective at 
warding off predators than the same behavior exhibited by individuals in 
larger groups.  
(C) Vigilant behavio r is easier to analyze in species that are preyed upon by many 
different predators than in species that are preyed upon by relatively few of 
them.  
(D) The term vigilant,  when used in reference to the behavior of animals, does 
not refer exclusively to beh avior aimed at avoiding predators.  
(E) The term vigilant,  when used in reference to the behavior of animals, 
usually refers to behavior exhibited by large groups of animals.  
20. The passage provides information in support of which of the following 
assertions?  
(A) The avoidance of pred ators is more important to an animal s survival than is 
the quest for food.  
(B) Vigilant behavior aimed at predators is seldom more beneficial to groups of 
animals than to individual animals.  
(C) Different species of animals often develop different strateg ies for dealing with 
predators.  
(D) The size of a group of animals does not necessarily reflect its success in 
finding food.  
(E) Similar behavior in different species of animals does not necessarily serve the 
same purpose.  
The earliest controversies about the relationship between photography and art centered on 
whether photography s fidelity to appearances and dependence on a machine allowed it to be a 
fine art as distinct from merely a practical art. Throughout the nineteenth century, the defense 
of photography was identical with the struggle to establish it as a fine art. Against the charge 
that photography was a soulless, mechanical copying of reality, photographers asserted that it 
was instead a privileged way of seeing, a revolt against commonplace vision, and no less 
worthy an art than painting.  
Ironically, now that photography is securely established as a fine art, many  photographers 
find it pretentious or irrelevant to label it as such. Serious photographers variously claim to be 
finding, recording, impartially observing, witnessing events, exploring themselves anything 
but making works of art. In the nineteenth century , photography s association with the real 
world placed it in an ambivalent relation to art; late in the twentieth century, an ambivalent 
relation exists because of the Modernist heritage in art. That important photographers are no 
longer willing to debate whether photography is or is not a fine art, except to proclaim that their 
own work is not involved with art, shows the extent to which they simply take for granted the  GRE  609 
 concept of art imposed by the triumph of Modernism: the better the art, the more subver sive it 
is of the traditional aims of art.  
Photographers  disclaimers of any interest in making art tell us more about the harried 
status of the contemporary notion of art than about whether photography is or is not art. For 
example, those photographers wh o suppose that, by taking pictures, they are getting away 
from the pretensions of art as exemplified by painting remind us of those Abstract Expressionist 
painters who imagined they were getting away from the intellectual austerity of classical 
Modernist p ainting by concentrating on the physical act of painting. Much of photography s 
prestige today derives from the convergence of its aims with  those of recent art, particularly 
with the dismissal of abstract art implicit in the phenomenon of Pop painting dur ing the 1960 s. 
Appreciating photographs is a relief to sensibilities tired of the mental exertions demanded by 
abstract art. Classical Modernist painting that is, abstract art as developed in different ways by 
Picasso, Kandinsky, and Matisse presupposes h ighly developed skills of looking and a 
familiarity with other paintings and the history of art. Photography, like Pop painting, reassures 
viewers that art is not hard; photography seems to be more about its subjects than about art.  
Photography, however, h as developed all the anxieties and self -consciousness of a classic 
Modernist art. Many professionals privately have begun to worry that the promotion of 
photography as an activity subversive of the  traditional pretensions of art has gone so far that 
the pu blic will forget that photography is a distinctive and exalted activity in short, an art.  
21. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) defining the Modernist attitude toward art  
(B) explaining how photography emerged as a fine art after t he controversies of 
the nineteenth century  
(C) explaining the attitudes of serious contemporary photographers toward 
photography as art and placing those attitudes in their historical context  
(D) defining the various approaches that serious contemporary ph otographers 
take toward their art and assessing the value of each of those approaches  
(E) identifying the ways that recent movements in painting and sculpture have 
influenced the techniques employed by serious photographers  
22. Which of the following adjectives best describes the concept of art imposed by 
the triumph of Modernism  as the author represents it in lines  25-27? 
(A) Objective  
(B) Mechanical  
(C) Superficial  
(D) Dramatic  
(E) Paradoxical  
23. The author introduces Abstract Expressionist painters (lines 34) in order to  
(A) provide an example of artists who, like serious contem porary photographers, 
disavowed traditionally accepted aims of modern art  
(B) call attention to artists whose works often bear a physical resemblance to the 610 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 works of serious contemporary photographers  
(C) set forth an analogy between the Abstract Expressio nist painters and classical 
Modernist painters  
(D) provide a contrast to Pop artists and others who created works that exemplify 
the Modernist heritage in art  
(E) provide an explanation of why serious photography, like other contemporary 
visual forms, is not and should not pretend to be an art  
24. According to the author, the nineteenth -century defenders of photography 
mentioned in the passage stressed that photography was  
(A) a means of making people familiar with remote locales and unfamiliar things  
(B) a technologically advanced activity  
(C) a device for observing the world impartially  
(D) an art comparable to painting  
(E) an art that would eventually r eplace the traditional arts  
25. According to the passage, which of the following best explains the reaction of 
serious contemporary photographers to the question of whether photography is an 
art? 
(A) The photographers  belief that their reliance on an impe rsonal machine to 
produce their art requires the surrender of the authority of their personal 
vision  
(B) The photographer s fear that serious photography  may not be accepted as an 
art by the contemporary art public  
(C) The influence of Abstract Expressioni st painting and Pop Art on the subject 
matter of the modern photograph  
(D) The photographers  belief that the best art is subversive of art as it has 
previously been defined  
(E) The notorious difficulty of defining art in its relation to realistic 
repre sentation  
26. According to the passage, certain serious contemporary photographers expressly 
make which of the following claims about their photographs?  
(A) Their photographs could be created by almost anyone who had a camera and 
the time to devote to the activity.  
(B) Their photographs are not examples of art but are examples of the 
photographers  impartial observation of the world.  
(C) Their photographs are important because of their subjects but not because of 
the responses they evoke in viewers.  
(D) The ir photographs exhibit the same ageless principles of form and shading 
that have been used in painting.  
(E) Their photographs represent a conscious glorification of the mechanical  GRE  611 
 aspects of twentieth -century life.  
27. It can be inferred from the passag e that the author most probably considers 
serious contemporary  photography to be a  
(A) contemporary art that is struggling to be accepted as fine art  
(B) craft requiring sensitivity but by no means an art  
(C) mechanical copying of reality  
(D) modern art th at displays the Modernist tendency to try to subvert the 
prevailing aims of art  
(E) modern art that displays the tendency of all Modernist art to become 
increasingly formal and abstract  
1995 10   
SECTION A  
It is possible for students to obtain advanced degrees in English while knowing little or 
nothing about traditional scholarly methods. The consequences of this neglect of traditional 
scholarship are particularly unfortunate for the study of women writers. If the canon the list of 
authors whose works are most widely taught is ever to include more women, scholars must 
be well train ed in historical scholarship and textual editing. Scholars who do not know how to 
read early manuscripts, locate rare books, establish a sequence of editions, and so on are 
bereft of crucial tools for revising the canon.  
To address such concerns, an experi mental version of the traditional scholarly methods 
course was designed to raise students  consciousness about the usefulness of traditional 
learning for any modern critic or theorist. To minimize the artificial aspects of the conventional 
course, the usua l procedure of assigning a large number of small problems drawn from the 
entire range of historical periods was abandoned, though this procedure has the obvious 
advantage of at least superficially familiarizing students with a wide range of reference sourc es. 
Instead students were engaged in a collective effort to do original work on a neglected 
eighteenth -century writer , Elizabeth Griffith, to give them an authentic experience of literary 
scholarship and to inspire them to take responsibility for the quali ty of their own work.  
Griffith s work presented a number of advantages for this particular pedagogical purpose. 
First, the body of extant scholarship  on Griffith was so tiny th at it could all be read in a day; thus 
students spent little time and effort mastering the literature and had a clear field for their own 
discoveries. Griffith s play The Platonic Wife  exists in three versions, enough to provide 
illustrations of editorial issues but not too many for beginning students to manage. In addition, 
because Griffith was successful in the eighteenth century, as her continued productivity and 
favorable reviews demonstrate, her exclusion from the canon and virtual disappearance from 
literary history also helped raise issues concerning the current canon.  
The range of Griffith s work meant that each student could become the world s leading 
authority on a particular Griffith text. For example, a student studying Griffith s Wife in the Rig ht 
obtained a first edition of the play and studied it for some weeks. This student was suitably 612 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 shocked and outraged to find its title transformed into A Wife in the Night in Watt s Bibliotheca 
Britannica . Such experiences, inevitable and common in workin g on a writer to whom so little 
attention has been paid, serve to vaccinate the student I hope for a lifetime against 
credulous use of reference sources.  
17. The author of the passage is  primarily concerned with  
(A) revealing a commonly ignored  deficiency  
(B) proposing a return to traditional terminology  
(C) describing an attempt to correct a shortcoming  
(D) assessing the success of a new pedagogical approach  
(E) predicting a change in a traditional teaching strategy  
18. It can be inferred that the author of the passage expects that the experience of the 
student mentioned as having studied Wife in the Right  would have which of the 
following effects?  
(A) It would lead the student to disregard information found in the Bibliotheca 
Britannica . 
(B) It would teach the student to question the accuracy of certain kinds of 
information sources when studying neglected authors.  
(C) It would teach the student to avoid th e use of reference sources in studying 
neglected authors.  
(D) It would help the student to understand the importance of first editions in 
establishing the authorship of plays.  
(E) It would enhance the student s appreciation of the works of authors  not 
included in the canon.  
19. The author of the passage suggests that which of the following is a disadvantage 
of the strategy employed in the experimental scholarly methods cours e? 
(A) Students were not given an opportunity to study women writers outside the 
canon.  
(B) Students  original work would not be appreciated by recognized scholars.  
(C) Little scholarly work has been done on the work of Elizabeth Griffith.  
(D) Most of the students in the course had had little opportunity to study 
eighteenth -century literature.  
(E) Students were not given an opportunity  to encounter certain sources of 
information that could prove useful in their future studies.  
20. Which of the following best states the particular pedagogical purpose  
mentioned in line 28? 
(A) To assist scho lars in revising the canon of authors  
(B) To minimize the trivial aspects of the traditional scholarly methods course  
(C) To provide students with information about Griffith s work  
(D) To encourage scholarly rigor in students  own research   GRE  613 
 (E) To reesta blish Griffith s reputation as an author  
21. Which of the following best describes the function of the last paragraph in 
relation to the passage as a whole?  
(A) It summarizes the benefits that students can derive from the experimental 
scholarly methods cou rse. 
(B) It provides additional reasons why Griffith s work raises issues having to do 
with the canon of authors.  
(C) It provides an illustration of the immediate nature of the experiences students 
can derive from the experimental scholarly methods course.  
(D) It contrasts the experience of a student in the experimental scholarly methods 
course with the experience of a student in the traditional course.  
(E) It provides information that emphasizes the suitability of Griffith s work for 
inclusion in the ca non of authors.  
22. It can be inferred that which of the following is most likely to be among the 
issues  mentioned in line 38? 
(A) Why has the work of Griffith, a woman writer who was popular in her own 
century, been excluded from the canon?  
(B) In what ways did Griffith s work reflect the political climate of the eighteenth 
century?  
(C) How was Griffith s work received by literary critics during the eighteenth 
century?  
(D) How did the error in the title of Griffith s play come to be made?  
(E) How did critical reception of Griffith s work affect the quantity and quality of 
that work?  
23. It can be inferred that the author of the passage considers traditional scholarly 
methods courses to be  
(A) irrelevant to the work of most students  
(B) inconsequential because of their narrow focus  
(C) unconcerned about the accu racy of reference sources  
(D) too superficial to establish important facts about authors  
(E) too wide -ranging to approximate genuine scholarly activity  
Experiments show that insects can function as pollinators of cycads , rare, palmlike tr opical 
plants . Furthermore, cycads removed from their native habitats and therefore from insects 
native to those habitats are usually infertile. Nevertheless , anecdotal reports of wind 
pollination in cycads cannot be ignored. The structure of cycads male c ones is quite consistent 
with the wind dispersal of pollen, clouds of which are released from some of the larger cones. 
The male cone of Cycas circinalis , for example, sheds almost 100 cubic centimeters of pollen, 
most of which is probably dispersed by win d. Still, many male cycad cones  are comparatively 
small and thus produce far less pollen. F urthermore, the structure of most female cycad cones 
seems inconsistent with direct pollination by wind. Only in the Cycas  genus are the females  614 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 ovules  accessible to airborne pollen, since only in this genus are t he ovules surrounded by a 
loose aggregation of megasporophylls  rather than by a tight cone.  
24. According to the passage, the size  of a male cycad cone directly influences which 
of the following?  
(A) The arrangement of the male co nes structural elements  
(B) The mechanism by which pollen is released from the male cone  
(C) The degree to which the ovules of female cycads are accessible to airborne 
pollen  
(D) The male cone s attractiveness to potential insect pollinators  
(E) The am ount of pollen produced by the male cone  
25. The passage suggests that which of the following is true of the structure of cycad 
cones?  
(A) The structure of cycad cones provides conclusive evidence in favor of one 
particular explanation of cycad pollination . 
(B) The structure of cycad cones provides evidence concerning what triggers the 
first step in the pollination process.  
(C) An irresolvable discrepancy exists between what the structure of most male 
cycad cones suggests about cycad pollination and what th e structure of most 
female cones suggests about that process.  
(D) The structure of male cycad cones rules out a possible mechanism for cycad 
pollination that is suggested by the structure of most female cycad cones.  
(E) The structure of male cycad cones  is consistent with a certain means of cycad 
pollination, but that means is inconsistent with the structure of most female 
cycad cones.  
26. The evidence in favor of insect pollination of cycads presented in lines 2-4 would 
be more convincing if which of th e following were also true?  
(A) Only a small variety of cycad species can be successful ly transplanted.  
(B) Cycads can sometimes be pollinated by means other than wind or insects.  
(C) Insects indigenous to regions to which cycads are transplanted sometimes  
feed on cycads.  
(D) Winds in the areas to which cycads are usually transplanted are similar to 
winds in cycads  native habitats.  
(E) The transplantation of cycads from one region to another usually involves the 
accidental removal and introduction of in sects as well.  
27. The passage suggests that which of the following is true of scientific 
investigations of cycad pollination?  
(A) They have not yet produced any systematic evidence of wind pollination in 
cycads.  
(B) They have so far confirmed anecdotal re ports concerning the wind pollination  GRE  615 
 of cycads.  
(C) They have, until recently, produced little evidence in favor of insect 
pollination in cycads.  
(D) They have primarily been carried out using cycads transplanted from their  
native habitats.  
(E) They have usually concentrated on describing the physical characteristics of 
the cycad reproductive system.  
SECTION B 
(This passage is adapted from an article published in 1981 .) 
The term remote sensing  refers to t he techniques of measurement and interpretation of 
phenomena from a distance. Prior to the mid -1960s the interpretation of film images was the 
primary means for remote sensing of the Earth s geologic features. With the development of 
the optomechanical sc anner, scientists began to construct digital multispectral images using 
data beyond the sensitivity range of visible light photography. These images are constructed by 
mechanically aligning pictorial representations of such phenomena as the reflection of l ight 
waves outside the visible spectrum, the refraction of radio waves, and the daily changes in 
temperature in areas on the Earth s surface. Digital multispectral imaging has now become the 
basic tool in geologic remote sensing from satellites.  
The advant age of digital over photographic imaging is evident: the resulting numerical 
data are precisely known, and digital data are not subject to the vagaries of difficult -to-control 
chemical processing. With digital processing, it is possible to combine a large number of 
spectral images. The acquisition of the first multispectral digital data set from the multispectral 
scanner (MSS) aboard the satellite Landsat  in 1972 consequently attracted the attention of the 
entire geologic communi ty. Landsat MSS data are now being applied to a variety of geologic 
problems that are difficult to solve by conventional methods alone. These include specific 
problems in mineral and energy resource exploration and the charting of glaciers and shallow 
seas. 
A more fundamental application of remote sensing is to augment conventional methods for 
geologic mapping of large areas. Regional maps present compositional, structural, and 
chronological information for reconstructing geologic evolution. Such reconstruc tions have 
important practical applications because the conditions under which rock units and other 
structural features are formed influence the occurrence of ore and petroleum deposits and 
affect the thickness and integrity of the geologic media in which the deposits are found.  
Geologic maps incorporate a large, varied body of specific field and laboratory 
measurements, but the maps must be interpretative because field measurements are always 
limited by rock exposure, accessibility and labor resources. Wit h remote -sensing techniques it is 
possible to obtain much geologic information more efficiently than it can be obtained on the 
ground. These techniques also facilitate overall interpretation. Since detailed geologic mapping 
is generally conducted in small areas, the continuity of regional features that have intermittent 
and variable expressions is often not recognized, but in the comprehensive views of Landsat 
images these continuities are apparent. However, some critical information cannot be obtained 616 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 through remote sensing, and several characteristics of the Landsat MSS impose limitations on 
the acquisition of diagnostic data. Some of these limitations can be overcome by designing 
satellite systems specifically for geologic purposes; but, to be most effect ive, remote -sensing 
data must still be combined with data from field surveys and laboratory tests, the techniques of 
the earlier twentieth century.  
17. By using the word interpretative  in line 40, the author is indicating which of the 
following?  
(A) Some  maps are based more on data from aerial photography than on data 
from field operations.  
(B) Some maps are based almost exclusively on laboratory measurements.  
(C) Some maps are based on incomplete data from field observations.  
(D) Some maps show only larg e geologic features.  
(E) Some maps can be three -dimensional.  
18. With which of the following statements about geologic mapping would the author 
be most likely to agree?  
(A) Geologic mapping is basically an art and not a science.  
(B) Geologic mapping has not changed signifi cantly since the early 1960 s. 
(C) Geologic mapping will have limited practical applications until 
remote -sensing systems are perfected.  
(D) A developmental milestone in geologic mapping was reached in 1972.  
(E) Without the present variety of remote -sensing techniques, geologic mapping 
could not be done.  
19. According to the passage, measurements of which of the following can be 
provided  by the optomechanical scanner but not by visible -light photography?  
(A) The amount of visible light reflected from oce ans 
(B) The density of foliage in remote areas on the Earth s surface  
(C) Daily temperature changes of areas on the Earth s surface  
(D) The degree of radioactivity emitted by exposed rocks on the Earth s surface  
(E) Atmospheric conditions over large landmasses  
20. It can be inferred from the passage that a major disadvantage of photographic 
imaging in geologic mapping is that such photography  
(A) cannot be used at night  
(B) cannot focus on the details of a geo logic area  
(C) must be chemically processed  
(D) is always enhanced by digital reconstruction  
(E) cannot reflect changes over extended periods of time  
21. It can be inferred from the passage that Landsat images differ from conventional 
geologic maps in t hat Landsat images   GRE  617 
 (A) reveal the exact size of petroleum deposits and ore deposits  
(B) indicate the continuity of features that might not otherwise be interpreted as 
continuous  
(C) predict the movements of glaciers  
(D) provide highly accurate data about t he occurrence of mineral deposits  
(E) reveal the integrity of the media in which petroleum deposits and ore deposits 
are found  
22. The passage provides information about each of the following topics EXCEPT:  
(A) the principal method of geologic remote sensing prior to the mid -1960 s 
(B) some of the phenomena measured by digital multi -spectral images in remote 
sensing  
(C) some of the practical uses of regional geologic maps  
(D) the kinds of problems that are difficult to solve solely through conventional 
methods of geologic mapping  
(E) the specific limitations of the Landsat multi -spectral scanner  
23. The passage suggests which of the following about the conventional methods  
mentioned in line 29? 
(A) They consist primarily of field surveys and laboratory measurements.  
(B) They are not  useful in providing information necessary for reconstructing 
geologic evolution.  
(C) They have rarely been used by geologists since 1972.  
(D) They are used primarily to gather compositional information about geologic 
features.  
(E) They are limited primarily because of difficulties involved in interpreting film 
images.  
Although the development of new infrastructure (such public facilities as power plants, 
schools , and bridges) is usually determined by governmental planning, s ometimes this 
development can be planned more flexibly and realistically by private investors who anticipate 
profit from the collection of user fees. Such profits can contribute to the financing of more 
infrastructure if demand proves great enough, whereas  the reluctance of developers to invest in 
such projects can signal that additional infrastructure is not needed. During the economic boom 
of the 1980 s, for example, the state of Virginia authorized private developers to build a $300 
million toll road. These developers obtained the needed right -of-way from property owners, but 
by 1993 they still had not raised the necessary financing. The unwillingness of investors to 
finance this project does not negate the viability of privately financed roads; rather, it illustrates 
a virtue of private financing. If a road appears unlikely to attract enough future traffic to pay for 
the road, then it should not be built.  
24. The primary purpose of the passage  is to 
(A) build a case for increasing  the development of new infrastructure  618 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (B) advocate an alternative to government financing of infrastructure  
(C) explain the failure of a privately financed venture  
(D) suggest the types of infrastructure most appropriate for private financing  
(E) argue against government restrictions on developing new infrastructure  
25. The passage implies that the governmental planning  mentioned in line 3 may 
lead to which of the following problems?  
(A) Improper use of profits derived from user fees  
(B) Unduly slow development of necessary new infrastructure  
(C) Unrealistic decisions about developing new infrastructure  
(D) Incorrect predictions about profits to be gained from user fees  
(E) Obstruction of private financing for the development of new inf rastructure  
26. According to the passage, which of the following is true of the toll road 
mentioned in line 12? 
(A) After it was built, it attracted too little traffic to pay for its construction.  
(B) It was partially financed by the state of Virginia.  
(C) Its development was authorized during an economic boom.  
(D) Its construction was controversial among local residents.  
(E) Its developers were discouraged by governmental restrictions on acquiring the 
necessary land.  
27. The passage suggests that which of the following would occur if a privately 
financed bridge that proved to be profitable failed after a number of year s to meet 
the demands of traffic?  
(A) Private developers who financed the bridge would rely on governmental 
authorities to develop new infrastructure.  
(B) User fees would be increased so that usage would become more costly.  
(C) Governmental authorities wou ld be reluctant to rely on private contractors to 
develop a new bridge.  
(D) The success of the project would be jeopardized by public dissatisfaction with 
the project s adequacy.  
(E) Profits generated by user fees would be used to help finance the construction 
of new infrastructure to alleviate the traffic problem.  
1996 04      
SECTION A  
As people age, their cells become less efficient and less able to replace damaged 
component s. At the same time their tissues stiffen. For example, the lungs and the heart 
muscle expand less successfully, the blood vessels become increasingly rigid, and the ligaments  GRE  619 
 and tendons tighten.  
Few investigators would attribute such diverse effects to a  single cause. Nevertheless, 
researchers have discovered that a process long known to discolor and toughen foods may also 
contribute to age -related impairment of both cells and tissues. That process is nonenzymatic 
glycosylation, whereby glucose becomes at tached to proteins without the aid of enzymes. 
When enzymes attach glucose to proteins (enzymatic glycosylation), they do so at a specific 
site on a specific protein molecule for a specific purpose. In contrast, the nonenzymatic process 
adds glucose haphaz ardly to any of several sites along any available peptide chain within a 
protein molecule.  
This nonenzymatic glycosylation of certain proteins has been understood by food chemists 
for decades, although few biologists recognized until recently that the same  steps could take 
place in the body. Nonenzymatic glycosylation begins when an aldehyde group (CHO) of 
glucose and an amino group (NH 2) of a protein are attracted to each other. The molecules 
combine, forming what is called a Schiff base within the protein . This combination is unstable 
and quickly rearranges itself into a stabler, but still reversible, substance known as an Amadori 
product.  
If a given protein persists in the body for months or years, some of its Amadori products 
slowly dehydrate and rearran ge themselves yet again, into new glucose -derived structures. 
These can combine with various kinds of molecules to form irreversible structures named 
advanced glycosylation end products (AGE s). Most AGE s are yellowish brown and fluorescent 
and have speci fic spectrographic properties. More important for the body, many are also able to 
cross-link adjacent proteins, particularly ones that give structure to tissues and organs. 
Although no one has yet satisfactorily described the origin of all such bridges bet ween proteins, 
many investigators agree that extensive cross -linking of proteins probably contributes to the 
stiffening and loss of elasticity characteristic of aging tissues.  
In an attempt to link this process with the development of cataracts (the browni ng and 
clouding of the lens of the eye as people age), researchers studied the effect of glucose on 
solutions of purified crystallin, the major protein in the lens of the eye. Glucose -free solutions 
remained clear, but solutions with glucose caused the pro teins to form clusters, suggesting that 
the molecules had become cross -linked. The clusters diffracted light, making the solution 
opaque. The researchers also discovered that the pigmented cross -links in human cataracts 
have the brownish color and fluoresc ence characteristic of AGE s. These data suggest that 
nonenzymatic glycosylation of lens crystallins may contribute to cataract formation.  
17. With which of the following statements concerning the stiffening of aging tissues 
would the author most likely ag ree? 
(A) It is caused to a large degree by an increased rate of cell multiplication.  
(B) It paradoxically both helps and hinders the longevity of proteins in the human 
body.  
(C) It can be counteracted in part by increased ingestion of glucose -free foods.  
(D) It is exacerbated by increased enzymatic glycosylation.  
(E) It probably involves the nonenzymatic glycosylation of proteins.  620 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 18. According to the passage, which of the following statements is true of the process 
that discolors and toughens foods?  
(A) It takes place more slowly than glycosylation in the huma n body.  
(B) It requires a higher ratio of glucose to protein than glycosylation requires in 
the human body.  
(C) It does not require the aid of enzymes to attach glucose to protein.  
(D) It proceeds more quickly when the food proteins have a molecular struct ure 
similar to that of crystallin proteins.  
(E) Its effectiveness depends heavily on the amount of environmental moisture.  
19. According to the passage, which of the following is characteristic of enzymatic 
glycosylation of proteins?  
(A) AGE s are formed after a period of months o r years.  
(B) Pr oteins affected by the process are made unstable.  
(C) Glucose attachment impairs and stiffens tissues.  
(D) Glucose is attached to proteins for specific purposes.  
(E) Amino groups combine with aldehyde groups to form Schiff bases.  
20. According to the pa ssage, which of the following statements is true of Amadori 
products in proteins?  
(A) They are more plentiful in a dehydrated environment.  
(B) They are created through enzymatic glycosylation.  
(C) They are composed entirely of glucose molecules.  
(D) They a re derived from Schiff bases.  
(E) They are derived from AGE s. 
21. Which of the following best describes the function of the third paragraph of the 
passage (lines 19-29)? 
(A) It offers evidence that contradicts the findings described in the first two 
paragraphs.  
(B) It presents a s pecific example of the process discussed in the first two 
paragraphs.  
(C) It explains a problem that the researchers mentioned in the second paragraph 
have yet to solve.  
(D) It evaluates the research discoveries described  in the previous paragraph.  
(E) It begins a detailed description of the process introduced in the previous two 
paragraphs.  
22. The passage suggests that which of the following would be LEAST important in 
determining whether nonenzymatic glycosylation is likely to have taken place in 
the proteins of a particular tissue?  
(A) The likelihood that the tissue has been exposed to free glucose   GRE  621 
 (B) The color and spectrographic properties of structures within the tissue  
(C) The amount of time that the proteins in the tissue have persisted in the bo dy 
(D) The number of amino groups within the proteins in the tissue  
(E) The degree of elasticity that the tissue exhibits  
23. If the hypothesis stated in lines 56-58 is true, it can be inferred that the crystallin 
proteins in the lenses of people with c ataracts  
(A) have increased elasticity  
(B) do not respond to enzymatic glycosylation  
(C) are more susceptible to stiffening than are other proteins  
(D) are at least several months old  
(E) respond more acutely than other proteins to changes in moisture l evels  
Writing of the Iroquois nation, Smith has argued that through the chiefs  council, tribal 
chiefs traditionally maintained complete control over the political affairs of both the Iroquois 
tribal league and the individual tribes belonging to the league , whereas the sole jurisdiction 
over religious affairs resided with the shamans. According to Smith, this division was 
maintained until  the late nineteenth century, when the dissolution of the chiefs  council and the 
consequent diminishment of the chiefs  political power fostered their increasing involvement in 
religious affairs.  
However, Smith fails to recognize that this division of power between the tribal chiefs and 
shamans  was not actually rooted in Iroquois tradition; rather,  it resulted from the Iroquois  
resettlement on reservations early in the nineteenth century. Prior to resettlement, the chiefs  
council controlled only the broad policy of the tribal league; individual tribes had 
institutions most important, the longhouse to govern their own affairs. In the longhouse, the 
tribes chief influenced both political and religious affairs.  
24. The primary purpose of the passage  is to 
(A) question the publi shed conclusions of a scholar concerning the history of the 
Iroquois nation  
(B) establish the relationship between an earlier scholar s work and new 
anthropological research  
(C) summarize scholarly controversy concerning an incident from Iroquois 
history  
(D) trace two generations of scholarly opinion concerning Iroquois social 
institutions  
(E) differentiate between Iroquois political practices and Iroquois religious 
practices  
25. It can be inferred that the author of the passage regards Smith s argument as  
(A) provocative and potentially useful, but flawed by poor organization  
(B) eloque ntly presented, but needlessly inflammatory  
(C) accurate in some of its particulars, but inaccurate with regard to an important 622 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 point  
(D) historically sound, but overly detailed and redundant  
(E) persuasive in its time, but now largely outdated  
26. The author of the passage implies that which of the following occurred after the 
Iroquois were resettled on reservations early in the nineteenth century?  
(A) Chiefs became more involved in their tribes  religious affairs.  
(B) The authority of the chiefs  counc il over the affairs of individual tribes 
increased.  
(C) The political influence of the Iroquois shamans was diminished.  
(D) Individual tribes coalesced into the Iroquois tribal league.  
(E) The longhouse because a political rather than a religious institution.  
27. Which of the following best expresses an opinion presented by the author of the 
passage?  
(A) Smith has overstated the importance of the political role played by Iroquois 
tribal chiefs in the nineteenth century.  
(B) Smith has overlooked the fact that the Iroquois rarely allowed their shamans 
to exercise political authority.  
(C) Smith has failed to explain why the chiefs  council was dissolved late in the 
nineteenth century.  
(D) Smith has failed to acknowledge the role prior to the nineteenth century of the 
Iroquois tribal chiefs in religious affairs.  
(E) Smith has failed to recognize that the very structure of Iroquois social 
institutions reflects religious beliefs.  
SECTION B 
 
Mary Barton , particularly in its early chapters, is a moving response to the suffering of the 
industrial worker in the Engl and of the 1840 s. What is most impressive about the book is the 
intense and painstaking effort made by the author, Elizabeth Gaskell, to convey the experience 
of everyday life in working -class homes. Her  method is partly documentary in nature: the novel 
includes such features as a carefully annotated reproduction of dialect, the exact details of food 
prices in an account of a tea party , an itemized description of the furniture of the Bartons  living 
room, and a transcription  (again annotated) of the ballad The Oldham Weaver.  The interest of 
this record is considerable, even though  the method has a slightly distancing  effect.  
As a member of the middle class, Gaskell could hardly help approaching working -class life 
as an outside observer and a reporter, and the reader of the novel is always conscious of  this 
fact. But there is genuine imaginative re -creation in her accounts of the walk in Green Heys 
Fields, of tea at the  Bartons  house, and of John Barton and his friend s discovery of the starving 
family in the cellar in the chapter Poverty and Death.  Indeed, for a similarly convincing 
re-creation of such families  emotions and responses (which are more crucial than the material  GRE  623 
 details on which the mere reporter is apt to concentrate), the English novel had to wait 60 years 
for the early writing of D. H. Lawrence. If Gaskell  never quite conveys the sense of full 
participation that would completely authenticate this aspect of Mary Barton , she still brings to 
these scenes an intuitive recognition of feelings that has its own sufficient conviction.  
The cha pter Old Alice s History  brilliantly dramatizes the situation  of that early generation 
of workers brought from the villages and the countryside to the urban industrial centers. The 
account of Job Legh, the weaver and naturalist who is devoted to the stud y of biology, vividly 
embodies one kind of response to an urban industrial environment: an affinity  for living things 
that hardens, by its  very contrast with its environment, into a kind of crankiness. The early 
chapters about factory workers walking out i n spring into Green Heys Fields; about Alice 
Wilson, remembering in her cellar the twig -gathering for brooms  in the native village that she 
will never again see; about Job Legh, intent  on his impaled insects capture  the characteristic 
responses of a genera tion to the new and crushing experience of industrialism. The other early 
chapters eloquently portray the development of the instinctive cooperation with each other that 
was already becoming an important tradition among workers.  
17. Which of the following best describes the author s attitude toward Gaskell s use 
of the method of documentary record in Mary Barton ? 
(A) Uncritical enthusiasm  
(B) Unresolved ambivalence  
(C) Qualified approval  
(D) Resigned acceptance  
(E) Mild irritation  
18. According to the pa ssage, Mary Barton  and the early novels of D. H. Lawrence 
share which of the following?  
(A) Depiction of the feelings of working -class families  
(B) Documentary objectivity about working -class circumstances  
(C) Richly detailed description of working -class a djustment to urban life  
(D) Imaginatively structured plots about working -class characters  
(E) Experimental prose style based on working -class dialect  
19. Which of the following is most closely analogous to Job Legh in Mary Barton , as 
that character is described in the passage?  
(A) An entomologist who collected butterflies as a child  
(B) A s mall-town attorney whose hobby is nature photography  
(C) A young man who leaves his family s dairy farm to start his own business  
(D) A city dweller who raises exotic plants on the roof of his apartment building  
(E) A union organizer who works in a text ile mill under dangerous conditions  
20. It can be inferred from examples given in the last paragraph of the passage that 
which of the following was part of the new and crushing experience of 
industrialism  (lines 46-47) for many members of the English wor king class in 624 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 the nineteenth century?  
(A) Extortionate food prices  
(B) Geographical displacement  
(C) Hazardous working conditions  
(D) Alienation from fellow workers  
(E) Dissolution of family ties  
21. It can be inferred that the author of the passage believes that Mary Barton  might 
have been an even better novel if Gaskell had  
(A) concentrated on the emotions of a single character  
(B) made no attempt to re -create e xperiences of which she had no firsthand 
knowledge  
(C) made no attempt to reproduce working -class dialects  
(D) grown up in an industrial city  
(E) managed to transcend her position as an outsider  
22. Which of the following phrases could best be substitut ed for the phrase this 
aspect of Mary Barton  in line 29 without changing the meaning of the passage 
as a whole?  
(A) the material details in an urban working -class environment  
(B) the influence of Mary Barton  on lawrence s early work  
(C) the place of Mary  Barton  in the development of the English novel  
(D) the extent of the poverty and physical suffering among England s industrial 
workers in the 1840 s 
(E) the portrayal of the particular feelings and responses of working -class 
characters  
23. The author of the passage describes Mary Barton  as each of the following 
EXCEPT:  
(A) insightful  
(B) meticulous  
(C) vivid  
(D) poignant  
(E) lyrical  
As of the late 1980 s, neither theorists no r large-scale computer climate models could 
accurately predict whether cloud systems would help or hurt a warming globe. Some studies 
suggested that a four percent increase in  stratocumulus  clouds over the ocean could 
compensate for a doubling in atmospheric carbon dioxide, preventing a potentially disastrous 
planetwide temperature increase. On the other hand, an increase in cirrus  clouds could increase 
global warming.  
That clouds represented the weakest element in climate models was illustrated by a study  GRE  625 
 of fourteen such models. Comparing climate forecasts for a world with double the current 
amount of carbon dioxide, researchers fou nd that the models agreed quite well if clouds were 
not included. But when clouds were incorporated, a wide range of forecasts was produced. 
With such discrepancies  plaguing the models, scientists could not easily predict how quickly the 
world s climate wo uld change, no r could they tell which regions would face dustier droughts or 
deadlier monsoons.  
24. The author of the passage is  primarily concerned with  
(A) confirming a theory  
(B) supporting a statement  
(C) presenting new information  
(D) predicting futur e discoveries  
(E) reconciling discrepant findings  
25. It can be inferred that one reason the fourteen models described in the passage 
failed to agree was that  
(A) they failed to incorporate the most up -to-date information about the effect of 
clouds on climate  
(B) th ey were based on faulty information about factors other than clouds that 
affect climate  
(C) they were based on different assumptions about the overall effects of clouds 
on climate  
(D) their originators disagreed about the kinds of forecasts the models shou ld 
provide  
(E) their originators disagreed about the factors other than clouds that should be 
included in the models  
26. It can be inferred that the primary purpose of the models included in the study 
discussed in the second paragraph of the passage was to  
(A) pr edict future changes in the world s climate  
(B) predict the effects of cloud systems on the world s climate  
(C) find a way to prevent a disastrous planetwide temperature increase  
(D) assess the percentage of the Earth s surface covered by cloud systems  
(E) estimate by how much the amount of carbon dioxide in the Earth s 
atmosphere will increase  
27. The information in the passage suggests that scientists would have to answer 
which of the following questions in order to predict the effect of clouds on the 
warming of the globe?  
(A) What kinds of cloud systems will form over the Earth?  
(B) How can cloud systems be encouraged to form over the ocean?  
(C) What are the causes of the projected planetwide temperature increase?  
(D) What proportion of cloud systems a re currently composed of cirrus of clouds?  626 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) What proportion of the clouds in the atmosphere form over land  masses?  
1996 04   
SECTION A  
For many years, Benjamin Quarles  seminal account of the participation of African 
Americans in the  American Revolut ion has remained the standard work in the field. According 
to Quarles, the outcome of this conflict was mixed for African American slaves who enlisted in 
Britain s fight against its rebellious  American colonies in return for  the promise of freedom: the 
British treacherously resold many into slavery in the West Indies , while others obtain ed 
freedom in Canada and Africa. Building on Quarles  analysis of the latter group, Sylvia Frey 
studied the former slaves who emigrated to British colonies in  Canada. According to Frey, these 
refugees the most successful of the African American Revolutiona ry War participants viewed 
themselves as the ideological heirs of the American Revolution. Frey sees this inheritances 
reflected in their demands for the same rights that the American revolutionaries had demanded 
from the British: land ownership, limits to  arbitrary authority and burdensome taxes, and  
freedom of religion.  
17. According to the passage, which of  the following is true about the African 
American Revolutionary War participants who settled in Canada after the 
American Revolution?  
(A) Although the y were politically unaligned with either side, they identified 
more with British ideology than with American ideology.  
(B) While they were not immediately betrayed by the British, they ultimately 
suffered the same fate as did African American Revolutionary  War 
participants who were resold into slavery in the West Indies.  
(C) They settled in Canada rather than in Africa because of the greater religious 
freedom available in Canada.  
(D) They were more politically active than were African American Revolutionary  
War participants who settled in Africa.  
(E) They were more successful than were African American Revolutionary War 
participants who settled Africa.  
18. Which of the following is most analogous to the relationship between the African 
American Revolution ary War participants who settled in Canada after the 
American Revolution and the American revolutionaries, as that relationship is 
described in the passage?  
(A) A brilliant pupil of a great musician rebels against the teacher, but adopts the 
teacher s musi cal style after the teacher s unexpected death.  
(B) Two warring rulers finally make peace after a lifetime of strife when they 
realize that they have been duped by a common enemy.  
(C) A child who has sided with a domineering parent against a defiant siblin g  GRE  627 
 later makes demands of the parent similar to those once made by the sibling.  
(D) A writer spends much of her life popularizing the work of her mentor, only to 
discover late in life that much of the older writer s work is plagiarized from 
the writings of a foreign contemporary.  
(E) Two research scientists spend much of their careers working together toward 
a common goal, but later quarrel over which of them should receive credit 
for the training of a promising student.  
19. The author of the passage suggests that which of the following is true of 
Benjamin Quarles  work?  
(A) It introduced a new and untried research methodology.  
(B) It contained theories so controversial that they gave rise to an entire 
generation of scholarship.  
(C) It was a pioneering work that has not yet been  displaced by subsequent 
scholarship.  
(D) It launched the career of a scholar who later wrote even more important 
works.  
(E) At the time it appeared, its author already enjoyed a well -established 
reputation in the field.  
20. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage concerning Britain s rule 
in its Canadian colonies after the American Revolution?  
(A) Humili ated by their defeat by the Americans, the British sharply curtailed 
civil rights in their Canadian colonies.  
(B) The British largely ignored their Canadian colonies.  
(C) The British encouraged the colonization of Canada by those African 
Americans who had served on the American side as well as by those who 
had served on the British side.  
(D) Some of Britain s policies in its Canadian colonies were similar to its policies 
in its American colonies before the American Revolution.  
(E) To reduce the debt incurred during the war, the British imposed even higher 
taxes on the Canadian colonists than they had on the American colo nists. 
Over the years, biologists have suggested two main pathways by which sexual selection  
may h ave shaped the evolution of male birdsong. In the first, male competition and intrasexual 
selection produce relatively short, simple songs used mainly in territorial behavior. In the 
second, female choice and intersexual selection produce longer, more comp licated songs used 
mainly in mate attraction; like such  visual ornamentation as the peacock s tail, elaborate vocal 
characteristics increase the male s chances of being chosen as a mate, and he thus enjoys more 
reproductive success than his less ostentatio us rivals. The two pathways are not mutually 
exclusive, and we can expect to find examples that reflect  their interaction. Teasing  them apart 
has been an im portant challenge to evolutionary biologists.  
Early research confirmed the role of intrasexual selection. In a variety of experiments in the 628 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 field, males responded aggressively to recorded songs by exhibiting territorial behavior near the 
speakers. The bre akthrough for research into intersexual selection came in the development of 
a new technique for investigating female response in the laboratory. When female cowbirds  
raised in isolation in sound -proof chambers were exposed to recor dings of male song, they 
responded by exhibiting mating behavior. By quantifying the responses, researchers were able 
to determine what particular features of the song were  most important. In further experiments 
on song sparrows , researchers found that when exposed to a  single song type repeated several 
times or to a repertoire of different so ng types, females responded more  to the latter. The 
beauty  of the experimental design is that it effectively rules out confou nding variables;  acoustic 
isolation assures that the female can respond only to the song structure itself.  
If intersexual selection operates as theorized, males with more complicated songs should 
not only  attract females more readily but should also enjoy greater reproductive success. At 
first, however, researchers doing fieldwork with song sparrows found no correlation between 
larger repertoires and early mating, which has been shown to be one indicator of reproductive 
success; further, common measures of male quality used to predict reproductive success, such 
as weight, size, age, and territory, also failed to correlate with song complexity.  
The confirmation researchers had been seeking was finally achieved in studies involving 
two varieties of warblers. U nlike the song sparrow, which repeats one of its several song types 
in bouts  before switching to another, the warbler continuously composes much longer and more 
variable songs without repetition. For the first time , researcher s found a significant correlation 
between repertoire size and early mating, and they discovered further that repertoire size had a 
more significant effect than any  other measure of male quality on the number of young 
produced. The evidence suggests that wa rblers  use their extremely elaborate songs primarily to 
attract females, clearly confirming the effect o f intersexual selection on the evolution o f 
birdsong.  
21. The passage is primarily concerned  with 
(A) showing that intrasexual selection has a greater e ffect on birdsong than does 
intersexual selection  
(B) contrasting the role of song complexity in several species of birds  
(C) describing research confirming the suspected relationship between intersexual 
selection and the complexity of birdsong  
(D) demonst rating the superiority of laboratory work over field studies in 
evolutionary biology  
(E) illustrating the effectiveness of a particular approach to experimental design 
in evolutionary biology  
22. The author mentions the peacock s tail in line 8 most probably in order to  
(A) cite an exception to the theory of the relationship between in trasexual 
selection and male competition  
(B) illustrate the importance of both of the pathways that shaped the evolution of 
birdsong  
(C) draw a distinction between competing theories of intersexual selection   GRE  629 
 (D) give an example of a feature that may have e volved through intersexual 
selection by female choice  
(E) refute a commonly held assumption about the role of song in mate attraction  
23. According to the passage, which of the following is specifically related to 
intrasexual selection?  
(A) Female choice  
(B) Territorial behavior  
(C) Complex song types  
(D) Large song repertoires  
(E) Visual ornamentation  
24. Which of the following, if true, would most clearly demonstrate the interaction 
mentioned in lines 11-13? 
(A) Female larks respond similarly both to short, simple songs and to longer, 
more complicated  songs.  
(B) Male canaries use visual ornamentation as well as elaborate song repertoires 
for mate attraction.  
(C) Both male and female blackbirds develop elaborate visual and vocal 
characteristics.  
(D) Male jays use songs to compete among themselves and to  attract females.  
(E) Male robins with elaborate visual  ornamentation have as much reproductive 
success as rivals with elaborate vocal characteristics.  
25. The passage indicates that researchers raised female cowbirds in acoustic 
isolation in order to  
(A) eliminate conf ounding variables  
(B) approximate field conditions  
(C) measure reproductive success  
(D) quantify repertoire complexity  
(E) prevent early mating  
26. According to the passage, the song sparrow is unlike  the warbler in that the song 
sparrow  
(A) uses songs mainly in territorial behavior  
(B) continuously composes long and complex songs  
(C) has a much larger song repertoire  
(D) repeats one song type before switching to another  
(E) responds aggressively to recorded songs  
27. The passage suggests that the son g sparrow experiments mentioned in lines 37 -43 
failed to confirm the role of intersex ual selection because  630 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) females were allowed to respond only to the song structure  
(B) song sparrows are unlike other species of birds  
(C) the experiments provided no ev idence that elaborate songs increased male 
reproductive success  
(D) the experiments included the songs of only a small number of different song 
sparrows  
(E) the experiments duplicated some of the limitations of previous field studies  
SECTION B 
An experiment conducted aboard Space Lab in 1983 was the first attempt to grow protein 
crystals in the low -gravity environment of space. That experiment is still  cited as evidence that 
growing crystals in microgravity can  increase crystal size: the authors reported that they grew 
lysozyme  protein crystals 1,000 times larger than crystals  grown in the same device on Earth. 
Unfortunately, the auth ors did not point out that their crystals were no larger  than the average 
crystal grown using other, more standard techniques in an Earth laboratory.  
No research has yet produced results that could justify the enormous costs of producing 
crystals on a larg e scale  in space. To get an unbiased view of the usefulness of microgravity 
crystal growth, crystals grown in space  must be compared with the best crystals that have been 
grown with standard techniques on Earth. Given the great  expense of conducting such 
experiments with proper controls, and the limited promise of experiments performed thus far, it 
is questionable whether further experiments in this area should even be conducted.  
17. According to the passage, which of  the following is true about the Space Lab  
experiment conducted in 1983?  
(A) It was the first experiment to take place in the microgravity environment of 
space.  
(B) It was the first experiment in which researchers in space were able to grow 
lysozyme protein crystals greater in size than those grow n on Earth.  
(C) Its results have been superseded by subsequent research in the field of 
microgravity protein crystal growth.  
(D) Its results are still considered by some to be evidence for the advantages of 
microgravity protein crystal growth.  
(E) Its r esults are considered by many to be invalid because nonstandard 
techniques were employed.  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would find the Space Lab 
experiment more impressive if which of the following were true?  
(A) The results of th e Space Lab experiment could be replicated in producing 
other kinds of crystals in addition to lysozyme protein.  
(B) The device used in the experiment produced larger crystals on Earth than it 
did in space.  
(C) The size of the crystals produced in the expe riment exceeded the size of  GRE  631 
 crystals  grown in Earth laboratories using standard techniques.  
(D) The cost of producing the crystals in space exceeded that of producing them 
using standard laboratory techniques.  
(E) The standard techniques used in Earth l aboratories were modified in the 
Space Lab experiment due to the effects of microgravity.  
19. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about the device used to 
grow crystals in the Space Lab experiment?  
(A) The device is more expensive to ma nufacture than are the devices used in 
standard techniques in an Earth laboratory.  
(B) The device has not been used to grow crystals in space since the Space Lab 
experiment of 1983.  
(C) Crystals grown in the device on Earth tend to be much smaller than cry stals 
grown in it in space.  
(D) Crystals grown in the device in space have been exceeded in size by crystals 
grown in subsequent experiments in space using other devices.  
(E) The experiments in which the device was used were conducted with proper 
contro ls. 
20. The passage suggests that the author would most probably agree with which of 
the following assessments of the results of the Space Lab experiment?  
(A) Although the results of the experiment are impressive, the experiment was too 
limited in scope to  allow for definitive conclusions.  
(B) The results of the experiment are impressive on the surface , but the report is 
misleading.  
(C) The results of the experiment convincingly confirm what researchers have 
long suspected.  
(D) Because of design flaws, the experiment did not yield any results relevant to 
the issue under investigation.  
(E) T he results of the experiment are too contradictory to allow for easy 
interpretation.  
In 1923 the innovative Russian filmmaker Dziga Vertov described filmmaking as a process 
that leads viewers toward a fresh perception of the world.  Vertov s description o f filmmaking 
should apply to films on the subject of art. Yet films on art have not had a powerful and 
pervasive effect on the way we see.  
Publications on art flourish, but these books and articles do not necessarily succeed in 
teaching us to see more deep ly or more clearly. Much writing in art history advances the 
discourse in the field but is unlikely to inform the eye of one unfamiliar with its polemics. Films, 
however, with their capacity to present material visual ly and to reach a broader audience, hav e 
the potential to enhance visual literacy (the ability to identify the details that characterize  a 
particular style) more effectively than publications can. Unfortunately, few of the hundred or so 
films on art that are made each year in the United States are broadcast nationally on 632 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 prime -time television.  
The fact that films on art are rarely seen on prime -time television may be due not only to 
limitations on distribution but also to the shortcomings of many such films. Some of these 
shortcomings can be att ributed to the failure of art historians and filmmakers to collaborate 
closely enough when making films on art. These professionals are able, within their respective 
disciplines, to increase our awareness of visual forms. For close collaboration to occur, 
professionals in each discipline need to recognize that films on art can be both educational and 
entertaining, but this will require compromise on both sides.  
A filmmaker who is creating a film about the work of an artist should not follow the 
standards se t by rock videos and advertising. Filmmakers need to resist the impulse to move 
the camera quickly from detail to detail for fear of boring the viewer, to frame the image for the 
sake of drama alone, to add music for fear of silence. Filmmakers are aware t hat an art object 
demands concentration and, at the same time, are concerned that it may not be compelling 
enough and so they hope to provide relief by interposing real scenes that bear only a 
tangential relationship to the subject. But a work of art nee ds to be explored on its own terms. 
On the other hand, art historians need to trust that one can indicate and analyze, not solely 
with words, but also by directing the viewer s gaze. The specialized written language of art 
history needs to be relinquished or at least tempered for the screen. Only an effective 
collaboration between filmmakers and art historians can create films that will enhance viewers  
perceptions of art.  
21. The passage suggests that a  filmmaker desiring to enhance viewers  perceptions 
of art should do which of the following?  
(A) Rely on the precise language of art history when developing scripts for films 
on art.  
(B) Rely on dramatic narrative and music to set a film s tone and style.  
(C) Recognize that a work of art by itself can be comp elling enough to hold a 
viewer s attention.  
(D) Depend more strongly on narration instead of camera movements to guide the 
viewer s gaze.  
(E) Emphasize the social and the historical contexts within which works of art 
have been created.  
22. The author of  the passage refers to Vertov in the first paragraph most probably in 
order to  
(A) provide an example of how films can be used to influence perceptions  
(B) present evidence to support the argument that films have been used 
successfully to influence viewers  perceptions  
(C) introduce the notion that film can influence how viewers see  
(D) contrast a traditional view of the uses of film with a more modern view  
(E) describe how film can change a viewer s perception of a work of art  
23. Which of the following best describes the organization of the passage?   GRE  633 
 (A) An observation about an unsatisfactory situation is offered, the reasons for the 
situation are discus sed, and then ways to change it are suggested.  
(B) Two opinions regarding a controversial phenomenon are contrasted, 
supporting evidence for each is presented, and then the two opinions are 
reconciled.  
(C) Criticism of a point of view is discussed, the cri ticism is answered, and then 
the criticism is applied to another point of view.  
(D) A point of view is described, evidence supporting the view is provided, and 
then a summary is presented.  
(E) A strategy is presented, reasons for its past failure are discussed, and then a 
recommendation that will be abandoned is offered.  
24. The passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) discussing why film s potential as a medium for presenting art to the general 
public has not been fully realized and how film might be made more 
effective in this regard  
(B) discussing the shortcomings of films on art and the technological innovations 
required to increase the impact of film on visual literacy  
(C) discussing the advantages and the disadvantages of using films rather than 
publications to present works  of art to the general public  
(D) presenting information to support the view that films on art must focus more 
on education and less on entertainment in order to i ncrease visual literacy  
(E) presenting information to support the view that films on art, because they 
reach a broader audience than many other kinds of media, have had greater 
success in promoting visual literacy  
25. The author would most likely agree with which of the following statements  about 
film and visual literacy?  
(A) Reading a publication about a work of art and then seeing a film about the 
same work is the most effective way to develop visual literacy.  
(B) An increase in a viewer s awareness of  visual forms will also lead to an 
increased attention span . 
(C) Film has a great but not yet fully exploited capacity to increase viewers  
awareness of visual forms.  
(D) A film that focuses on the details of a work of ar t will hinder the development 
of visual literacy.  
(E) Films on art would more effectively enhance the visual literacy of teenagers if 
filmmakers followed the standards set by rock videos.  
26. According to the passage, art historians desiring to work wit h filmmakers to 
enhance the public s appreciation of art need to acknowledge which of the 
following?  
(A) The art historian s role in the creation of a film on art is likely to be  a 634 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 relatively minor one.  
(B) Film provides an ideal opportunity to acquaint vi ewers with a wide range of 
issues that relate incidentally to a work of art.  
(C) An in -depth analysis of a work of art is not an appropriate topic for a film on 
art. 
(D) Although silence may be an appropriate background when viewing a work of 
art in a muse um, it is inappropriate in a film.  
(E) Film can use nonverbal means to achieve some of the same results that a 
spoken or written discourse can achieve.  
27. Which of the following would describe the author s most likely reaction to a 
claim that films on art would more successfully promote visual literacy if  they 
followed the standards set for rock  videos?  
(A) Ambivalence  
(B) Indifference  
(C) Sympathy  
(D) Interest  
(E) Disdain  
1996 10   
SECTION A  
This is not to deny that the Black gospel music of the ear ly twentieth century differed in 
important ways from the slave spirituals. Whereas spirituals were created and disseminated in 
folk fashion, gospel music was composed, published, copyrighted, and sold by professionals. 
Nevertheless, improvisation remained central to gospel music. One has only to listen to the 
recorded repertoire of gospel songs to realize that Black gospel singers rarely sang a song 
precisely the same way twice and never according to its exact musical notation . They 
performed what jazz musicians call head arrangements  proceeding from their own feelings 
and from the way the spirit  move d them at the time. This improvisatory element was reflected 
in the manner in which gospel music was published. Black gospel composers scored the music 
intended for White singing groups fully, indicating the various vocal parts and the 
accompaniment, but t he music produced for Black singers included only a vocal line and piano 
accompaniment.  
17. Which of the following best describes head arrangement  as the term is used in 
line 1 1? 
(A) A published version of a gospel song produced for use by Black singers  
(B) A gospel song b ased on a slave spiritual  
(C) A musical score shared by a gospel singer and a jazz musician  
(D) An informally written composition intended for use by a gospel singer   GRE  635 
 (E) An improvised performance inspired by the singer s emotions  
18. The author mentions folk fashion  (line 4) most likely in order to  
(A) counter an assertion about the role of improvisation in music created by 
Black people  
(B) compare early gospel m usic with gospel music written later in the twentieth 
century  
(C) make a distinction between gospel music and slave spirituals  
(D) introduce a discussion about the dissemination of slave spirituals  
(E) describe a similarity between gospel music and slav e spirituals  
19. The passage suggests which of the following about Black gospel music and slave 
spirituals?  
(A) Both became widely known in the early twentieth century.  
(B) Both had an important improvisatory element.  
(C) Both were frequently performed by jazz musicians.  
(D) Both were published with only a vocal line and piano accompaniment.  
(E) Both were disseminated chiefly by Black singing groups.  
20. Of the following sentences, which is most likely to have immediately preceded 
the passage?  
(A) Few composers of gospel music drew on traditions such as the spiritual in 
creating their song s. 
(B) Spirituals and Black gospel music were derived from the same musical 
tradition.  
(C) The creation and singing of spirituals, practiced by Black Americans before 
the Civil War, continued after the war.  
(D) Spirituals and gospel music can be clearly di stinguished from one another.  
(E) Improvisation was one of the primary characteristics of the gospel music 
created by Black musicians.  
About a century ago, the Swedish physical scientist Arrhenius proposed a law of classical 
chemistry that relates chemical reaction rate to temperat ure. According to the Arrhenius 
equation, chemical reaction s are increasingly unlikely to occur as temperatures approach 
absolute zero , and at absolute zero (zero degrees Kelvin, or minus 273 degrees Celsius) 
reactions s top. However, recent experimental evidence reveals that although the Arrhenius 
equation is generally accurate in describing the kind of chemical reaction that occurs at 
relatively high temperatures, at temperatures closer to zero a quantum -mechanical effec t 
known as tunneling comes into play; this effect accounts for chemical reactions that are 
forbidden by the principles of classical chemistry. Specifically, entire molecules can tunnel  
through the barriers of repulsive forces from other molecules and che mically react even though 
these molecules do not have sufficient energy, according to classical chemistry, to overcome the 
repulsive barrier.  636 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 The rate of any chemical reaction, regardless of the temperature at which it takes place, 
usually depends on a ver y important characteristic known as its activation energy. Any molecule 
can be imagined to reside at the bottom of a so -called potential well of energy. A chemical 
reaction corresponds to the transition of a molecule from the bottom of one potential well t o the 
bottom of another. In classical chemistry, such a transition can be accomplished only by going 
over the potential barrier between the wells, the height of which remains constant and is called 
the activation energy of the reaction. In tunneling, the r eacting molecules tunnel from the 
bottom of one to the bottom of another well without having to rise over the barrier between the 
two wells. Recently researchers have developed the concept of tunneling temperature: the 
temperature below which tunneling tra nsitions greatly outnumber Arrhenius transitions, and 
classical mechanics gives way to its quantum counterpart.  
This tunneling phenomenon at very low temperatures suggested my hypothesis about a 
cold prehistory of life:  the formation of rather complex orga nic molecules in the deep cold of 
outer space, where temperatures usually reach only a few degrees Kelvin. Cosmic rays 
(high-energy protons and other particles) might trigger the synthesis of simple molecules, such 
as interstellar formaldehyde, in dark clo uds of interstellar dust. Afterward complex organic 
molecules would be formed, slowly but surely, by means of tunneling. After I offered my 
hypothesis, Hoyle and Wickramasinghe argued that molecules of interstellar formaldehyde 
have indeed evolved into sta ble polysaccharides such as cellulose and starch. Their conclusions, 
although strongly disputed, have generated excitement among investigators such as myself 
who are proposing that the galactic clouds are the places where the prebiological  evolution of 
compounds necessary to life occurred.  
21. The author of the passage is  primarily concerned with  
(A) describing how the principles of classical chemistry were developed  
(B) initiating a debate about the kinds of chemical reactions required for the 
development of life  
(C) explaining how current research in chemistry may be related to broader 
biological concerns  
(D) reconciling opposing theories about chemical reactions  
(E) clarifying inherent ambiguities in the laws of classical c hemistry  
22. According to the passage, classical chemical reactions and tunneling reactions are 
alike in which of the following ways?  
(A) In both types of reactions, reacting molecules have to rise over the barrier 
between the two wells.  
(B) In both types of reactions, a transition is ma de from the bottom of one 
potential well to the bottom of another.  
(C) In neither type of reaction does the height of the barrier between the wells 
remain constant.  
(D) In neither type of reaction does the rate of a chemical  reaction depend on its 
activation energy.  
(E) In both types of reactions, reacting molecules are able to go through the  GRE  637 
 barrier between the two wells.  
23. According to the Arrhenius equation as discussed in the passage, which of the 
following statement s about chemical reactions is true?  
(A) Chemical reactions are less likely to occur at temperatures close to absolute 
zero.  
(B) In some cases the rate of a chemical reaction is related to temperature and in 
other cases it is not.  
(C) Chemical reactions fre quently occur at a few degrees above absolute zero, but 
they are very unpredictable . 
(D) The rate of a chemical reaction depends on many other factors besides 
temperature.  
(E) Chemical reaction rate and temperature are not related.  
24. The author s attitude toward the theory of a cold pre -history of life can best be 
described as  
(A) neutral  
(B) skeptical  
(C) mildly positive  
(D) very supportive  
(E) pointedly critical  
25. The author s hypothesis concerning the cold prehistory of life would be most 
weakened if which of the following were true?  
(A) Cosmic rays are unlikely to trigger the formation of simple molecules.  
(B) Tunneling occurs only in a narrow band of temperatu res around zero degrees 
Kelvin.  
(C) The synthesis of interstellar formaldehyde can be activated by means other 
than cosmic rays.  
(D) Simple molecules can be synthesized by means of tunneling.  
(E) Classical chemical reaction s do not occur at temperatures close to absolute 
zero.  
26. Which of the following best describes the hypothesis of Hoyle and 
Wickramasinghe as it is presented in the passage?  
(A) Cosmic rays can directly synthesize comple x organic molecules.  
(B) The galactic clouds are the places where prebiological evolution of 
compounds necessary to life occurred.  
(C) Interstellar formaldehyde can be synthesized by tunneling.  
(D) Molecules of interstellar formaldehyde can evolve into com plex organic 
molecules.  
(E) Complex organic molecules can be synthesized from stable polysaccharides 638 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 such as cellulose and starch.  
27. Which of the following best describes the organization of the first two paragraphs 
of the passage?  
(A) The author cites a basic principle of classical chemistry and then describes 
the research from which that principle was developed.  
(B) The author cites an apparent contradiction to the principles of classical 
chemistry and then explains the process of a chemical reaction to show there 
is in fa ct no contradiction.  
(C) The author describes the role of heat in chemical reactions and then offers a 
detailed explanation of its function.  
(D) The author presents a law of classical chemistry in order to introduce a kind 
of chemical reaction that differs  from it and then explains the essential 
difference between the two.  
(E) The author presents the fundamental rules of classical chemistry in order to 
introduce an explanation of a specific chemical reaction.  
SECTION B 
Although the hormone adrenaline is known to regulate memory storage, it does not pass 
from the blood into brain cells. We are faced with an apparent paradox: how can a hormone 
that does not act directly on the brain have such a large effect on brain function?  
Recently, we tested the possibi lity that one of the hormone s actions outside the brain 
might be responsible . Since one consequence of adrenaline release in an animal is an increase 
in blood glucose levels, we examined the effects of glucose on memory in rats. We found that 
glucose inje cted immediately after training enhances memory tested the next day. Additional 
evidence was provided by negative findings: drugs called adrenergic antagonists, which block 
peripheral adrenaline receptors, disrupted adrenaline s ability to regulate memory but did not 
affect memory enhancements produced by glucose that was not stimulated by adrenaline. 
These results are as they should be if adrenaline affects memory modulation by increasing 
blood glucose levels.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage  is to 
(A) reconcile two opposing theories  
(B) compare two different explanations  for a phenomenon  
(C) describe experimental research that appears to support an unpopular theory  
(D) present evidence that may help to  resolve an apparent contradiction  
(E) describ e a hypothesis that has cause a controversy  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would most likely describe the 
additional evidence  (line 12) provided  by experiments with adrenergic 
antagonists as  
(A) revolutionary   GRE  639 
 (B) disappointing  
(C) incomplete  
(D) unexpected  
(E) corroborative  
19. The passage provides information about which of the following topics?  
(A) The mechanism by which glucose affects memory storage  
(B) The evidence that prompted scientist to test the effects of adrenaline on 
memory regulation  
(C) Th e reason that the effects of glucose on memory were tested  
(D) The ways that memory storage modifies the structure of the brain  
(E) The kinds of training used to test memory enhancement in rats  
20. The author refers to the results of the experiment usin g adrenergic antagonists as 
negative findings  (line 1 3) most likely because the adrenergic antagonists  
(A) failed to disrupt adrenaline s effect on memory  
(B) did not affect glucose s ability to enhance memory  
(C) did not block adrenaline s ability to in crease blood glucose levels  
(D) only partially affected adrenaline s ability to enhance memory  
(E) disrupted both adrenaline s and glucose s effect on memory  
The age at which young children begin to make moral discriminations about harmful 
actions committed against themselves or others has been the focus of recent research into the 
moral develop ment of children. Until recently, child psychologists supported pioneer 
developmentalist Jean. Piaget in his hypothesis that because of their immaturity, children under 
age seven do not take into account the intentions of a person committing accidental or 
deliberate harm, but rather simply assign punishment for transgressions on the basis of  the 
magnitude of the negative consequences caused. According to Piaget, children under age 
seven occupy the first stage of moral development, which is characterized by moral absolutism 
(rules made by authorities must be obeyed) and imminent  justice (if rules are broken, 
punishment will be meted  out). Until young children mature, their moral judgments are based 
entirely on the effect rather than the cause of a transgression. However, in recent research, 
Keasey found that six -year-old children not only distinguish between accidental and inten tional 
harm, but also judge intentional harm as naughtier, regardless of the amount of damage 
produced . Both of these findings seem to indicate that children, at an earlier age than Piaget 
claimed, advance into the second stage of moral development, moral autonomy, in which they 
accept social rules but view them as more arbitrary than do children in the first stage.  
Keasey s research raises two key questions for developmental psychologist s about children 
under age seven: do  they recognize justifications for  harmful actions, and do they make 
distinctions between harmful acts that are preventable and those acts that have unforeseen 
harmful consequences? Studies indicate that justifications excusing harmful actions might 
include public duty, self -defense, and p rovocation. For example, Nesdale and Rule concluded 
that children were capable of considering whether or not an aggressor s action was justified by 640 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 public duty: five year olds reacted very differently to Bonnie wrecks Ann s pretend house  
depending on whe ther Bonnie did it so somebody won t fall over it  or because Bonnie wanted 
to make Ann feel bad.  Thus, a child of five begins to understand that certain harmful actions, 
though intentional, can be justified; the constraints of moral absolutism no longe r solely guide 
their judgments.  
Psychologists have determined that during kindergarten children learn to make subtle 
distinctions involving harm. Darley observed that among acts involving unintentional harm, 
six-year-old children just entering kindergarten  could not differentiate between foreseeable, 
and thus preventable, harm and unforeseeable harm for which the perpetrator cannot be 
blamed. Seven months later, however, Darley found that these same children could make both 
distinctions, thus demonstrating that they had become morally autonomous.  
21. Which of the following best describes the passage as a whole?  
(A) An outline for future research  
(B) An expanded definition of commonly misunderstood terms  
(C) An analysis of a dispute between two theorists  
(D) A discussion of research findings in an ongoing inquiry  
(E) A confirmation of an established authority s theory  
22. According to the passage, Darley found that after seven months of kindergarten 
six year olds acquired which of the following abilities?  
(A) Differentiating between foreseeable and unforeseeabl e harm  
(B) Identifying with the perpetrator of a harmful action  
(C) Justifying harmful actions that result from provocation  
(D) Evaluating the magnitude of negative consequences resulting from the 
breaking of rules  
(E) Recognizing the difference between  moral absolutism and moral autonomy  
23. According to the passage, Piaget and Keasey would not have agreed on which of 
the following points?  
(A) The kinds of excuses children give for harmful acts they commit  
(B) The age at which children begin to discrimi nate between intentional and 
unintentional harm  
(C) The intentions children have in perpetrating harm  
(D) The circumstances under which children punish harmful acts  
(E) The justifications children recognize for mitigating punishment for harmful 
acts 
24. It can be inferred that the term public duty  (line 33) in the context of the 
passage means which of the following?  
(A) The necessity to apprehend perpetrators.  
(B) The responsibility to punish transgressors   GRE  641 
 (C) An obligation to prevent harm to another  
(D) The assignment of punishment for harmful action  
(E) A justification for punishing transgressions  
25. According to the passage, Keasey s findings support which  of the following 
conclusions about six -year-old children?  
(A) They have the ability to make autonomous moral judgments.  
(B) They regard moral absolutism as a threat to their moral autonomy.  
(C) They do not understand the concept of public duty.  
(D) They a ccept moral judgment made by their peers more easily than do older 
children.  
(E) They make arbitrary moral judgments.  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that Piaget would be likely to agree with 
which of the following statements about the punishment that children under seven 
assign  to wrongdoing?  
(A) The severity of the as signed punishment is determined by the perceived 
magnitude of negative consequences more than by any other factor.  
(B) The punishment is to be administered immediately following the 
transgression.  
(C) The children assign punishment less arbitrarily than th ey do when they reach 
the age of moral autonomy.  
(D) The punishment for acts of unintentional harm is less severe than it is for acts 
involving accidental harm.  
(E) The more development ally immature a child, the more severe the punishment 
that the child will assign.  
27. According to the passage, the research of Nesdale and Rule suggests which of the 
following about five -year-old children?  
(A) Their reactions t o intentional and accidental harm determine the severity of 
the punishments they assign.  
(B) They, as perpetrators of harmful acts, disregard the feelings of the children 
they harm.  
(C) They take into account the motivations of actions when judging the beh avior 
of other children.  
(D) They view public duty as a justification for accidental, but not intentional, 
harm.  
(E) They justify any action that protects them from harm.  
1997 04   
SECTION A  642 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Geologists Harris and Gass hypothesized that the Red Sea rift developed along the line of a 
suture (a splice in the Earth s crust) formed during the late Proterozoic era, and  that significant 
observable differences in the  composition of the upper layers of rocks deposited on either side 
of the suture give clues to the different natures of  the underlying igneous rocks.  
Other geologists argued that neither the upper rock layer n or the underlying igneous rocks 
on the one side of the rift differ fundamentally from the corresponding layers on the other side. 
These geologists believe, therefore, that  there is inadequate evidence to conclude that a suture 
underlies the rift.  
In respon se, Harris and Gass asserted that the upper rock layers on the two sides of the rift 
had not been shown  to be of similar age, structure, or geochemical content. Furthermore, they 
cited new evidence that the underlying  igneous rocks on either side of the ri ft contain 
significantly different kinds of rare metals.  
17. Part of the Harris and Gass  hypothesis about the Red Sea rift would be weakened 
if it could be demonstrated that the composition of upper rock layers  
(A) cannot cause a suture to develop  
(B) has no effect on where a suture will occur  
(C) cannot provide information about the nature of underlying rocks  
(D) is similar on the two sides of a rift unless a suture divides the two sides  
(E) is usually different from the composition of underlying rocks  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that the Other geologists  (line 8) would be 
most likely to agree with which of the following statements?  
(A) Similar geological features along both sides of a possible suture imply the 
existence of that suture.  
(B) Sutures can be discovered only where they are not obscured by superimposed 
geological features.  
(C) The composition of igneous rocks permits prediction of the likelihood of a rift 
developing through them.  
(D) It is possible to date igneous rocks by carefu lly studying the different kinds of 
rare metals contained in them and by observing their similarity to the layer 
of rock that lies above them.  
(E) The existence of rock layers on one side of a rift that are similar in 
composition to rock layers on the o ther side suggests that no suture exists 
between the two sides.  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that Harris and Gass have done which of the 
following?  
(A) Drawn detailed diagrams of the Red Sea rift.  
(B) Based their conclusions on the way in which sutures develop in the Earth s 
crust.  
(C) Rejected other geologists objections to their hypothesis about the Red Sea 
rift.  GRE  643 
 (D) Suggested that the presence of rare metals in rocks indicates an underlying 
suture.  
(E) Asserted that rifts usually occur along the lines of sutures.  
20. According to the passage, Harris and Gass have mentioned all of the following 
properties of rocks along the Red Sea rift EXCEPT:  
(A) age of the upper layers of rock  
(B) structure of the upper layers of rocks  
(C) geochemical content of the upper layers of rocks  
(D) metallic content of the underlying igneous rocks  
(E) age of the underlying igneous rocks  
 
Proponents of different jazz styles have always argued that their predecessors  musical 
style did not include essential characteristics that define jazz as jazz. Thus, 1940 s swing was 
belittled by beboppers of the 1950 s, who  were themselves attacked by free jazzers of the 
1960s. The neoboppers of the 1980 s and 1990 s attacked almo st everybody else. The titanic 
figure of Black saxophonist John Coltrane has complicated the arguments made by  proponents 
of styles from bebop through neobop because in his own musical journey he drew from all 
those styles . His influence on all types of ja zz was immeasurable. At the height of his popularity, 
Coltrane largely abandoned  playing bebop, the style that had brought him fame, to explore the 
outer reaches of jazz.  
Coltrane himself probably believed that the only essential characteristic of jazz was  
improvisation, the one constant in his journey from bebop to open -ended improvisations on 
modal, Indian, and African melodies. On the other hand, this dogged student and prodigious 
technician who insisted on spending hours each day practicing scales from theory books was 
never able to jettison completely the influence of bebop, with its fast and elaborate chains of 
notes and ornaments on melody.  
Two stylistic characteristics shaped the way Coltrane played the tenor saxophone, he 
favored playing fast runs o f notes built on a melody and depended on heavy, regularly accented 
beats. The first led Coltrane to sheets of sound , where he raced faster and faster, pile -driving 
notes into each other to suggest stacked harmonies. The second meant  that his sense of 
rhythm was almost as close to rock as to bebop.  
Three recordings illustrate Coltrane s energizing explorations. Recording Kind of Blue  with 
Miles Davis, Coltrane found himself outside bop, exploring modal melodies. Here he played 
surging, lengthy solos built  largely  around repeated motifs an organizing principle unlike that 
of free jazz saxophone player Ornette Coleman, who  modulated or altered melodies in his solos. 
On Giant Steps , Coltrane debuted as leader, introducing his own  compositions. Here the sheets  
of sound, downbeat accents, repetitions , and great speed are part of each solo, and the  variety 
of the shapes of his phrases is unique. Coltrane s searching explorations produced solid 
achievement. My Favorite Things  was another kind of watershed. Here Co ltrane played the 
soprano saxophone, an instrument seldom used by jazz musicians. Musically, the results were 
astounding. With the soprano s piping sound , ideas that had  sounded dark and brooding 644 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 acquired a feeling of giddy fantasy.  
When Coltrane began rec ording for the Impulse! label, he was still searching. His music 
became raucous, physical. His influence on rockers was enormous, including Jimi Hendrix, the 
rock guitarist, who , following Coltrane, raised the extended guitar solo using repeated motifs to 
a kind of rock art form.  
21. The primary purpose of the passage  is to 
(A) discuss the place of Coltrane in the world of jazz and describe his musical 
explorations  
(B) examine the nature of bebop and contrast it with improvisational jazz  
(C) analyze the mus ical sources of Coltrane s style and their influence on his 
work  
(D) acknowledge the influence of Coltrane s music on rock music and rock 
musicians  
(E) discuss the arguments that divide the proponents of different jazz styles  
22. The author implies that  which of the following would have been an effect of 
Coltrane s having chosen to play the tenor rather than the soprano saxophone on 
My Favorite Things ? 
(A) The tone of the recording would have been more somber.  
(B) The influence of bebop on the recording would have been more obvious.  
(C) The music on the recording would have sounded less raucous and physical.  
(D) His influence on rock music might have been less pervasive.  
(E) The style of the recording would have been indistinguishable from that on 
Kind of Blue.  
23. Which of the following best describes the organization of the fourth paragraph?  
(A) A thesis referred to earlier in the passage is mentioned and illustrated  with 
three specific examples.  
(B) A thesis is stated and three examples are given each suggesting that a 
correction needs to be made to a thesis referred to earlier in the passage.  
(C) A thesis referred to earlier in the passage is mentioned, and three ex amples 
are presented and ranked in order of their support of the thesis.  
(D) A thesis is stated, three seemingly opposing examples are presented, and their 
underlying correspondence is explained.  
(E) A thesis is stated, three dissimilar examples are considered, and the thesis is 
restated.  
24. According to the passage, John Coltrane did all of the following during his career  
EXCEPT:  
(A) improvise on melodies from a number of different cultures  
(B) perform as leader as well as soloist   GRE  645 
 (C) spend time improving his technical skills  
(D) experiment with the sounds of various instruments  
(E) eliminate the influence of bebop on his own music  
25. The author mentions the work of Ornette Coleman in the fourth paragraph in 
order to do which of the following?  
(A) Expand the discussion by mentioning the work of a saxophone playe r who 
playe d in Coltrane s style.  
(B) Compare Coltrane s solos with the work of another jazz artist.  
(C) Support the idea that rati onal organizing principles need to be applied to 
artistic work.  
(D) Show the increasing intricacy of Coltrane s work after he abandoned bebop.  
(E) Indicate disagreement with the way Coltrane modulated the motifs in his 
lengthy solos.  
26. According to the passage, a major difference between Coltrane and other jazz 
musicians was the  
(A) degree to which Coltrane s music encompassed all of jazz  
(B) repetition of motifs that Coltrane used in his solos  
(C) number of his own compositions that Coltrane recorded  
(D) indifference Coltrane maintained to musical technique  
(E) importance Coltrane placed on rhythm in jazz  
27. In terms of its tone and for m, the passage can best be characterized as  
(A) dogmatic explanation  
(B) indignant denial  
(C) enthusiastic praise  
(D) speculative study  
(E) lukewarm review  
SECTION B 
A special mucous coating that serves as a chemical camouflage allows clown fish to live  
among the deadly tentacles of the unsuspecting sea anemone . Utterly depe ndent on this 
unlikely host for protection from predators, clown fish have evolved in isolated communities, a 
pattern that has led to unusual behavioral adaptations.  
The rigidly defined hierarchy of each clown -fish community is dominated by a 
monogamous br eeding pair consisting of the largest fish, a female, and the next largest, a male, 
attended by a fixed number of sexually immature fish ranging in size from large to tiny. A 
remarkable adaptation is that the development of these juveniles is somehow arres ted until the 
hierarchy changes; then they grow in lockstep , maintaining their relative sizes. While the 
community thus economizes on limited space and food resources, life is risky for newly 646 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 spawned clown fish. On hatching, the hundreds of larvae drift off into the plankton. If, within 
three weeks, the defenseless larval clown fish locates a suitable anemone  (either by pure 
chance or perhaps gu ided by chemicals secreted by the anemone), it may survive. However, if 
an anemone is fully occupied, the resident clown fish will repel any newcomer.  
Though advantageous for established community members, the suspended and staggered 
maturation of juvenile s might seem to pose a danger to the continuity of the community: there 
is only one successor for two breeding fish. Should one of a pair die, the remaining fish cannot 
swim off in search of a mate, nor is one likely to arrive. It would seem inevitable tha t 
reproduction must sometimes have to halt, pending  the chance arrival and maturation of a 
larval fish of the appropriate sex.  
This, however, turns out not to be the case.  In experiments, vacancies have been 
contrived by removing an establ ished fish from a community. Elimination of the breeding male 
triggers the prompt maturation of the largest juvenile. Each remaining juvenile also grows 
somewhat, and a minuscule newcomer drops in from the plankton . Removal of the female also 
triggers grow th in all remaining fish and acceptance of a newcomer, but the female is replaced 
by the adult male. Within days, the male s behavior alters and physiological transformation is 
complete within a few months. Thus, whichever of the breeding pair is lost, a r elatively large 
juvenile can fill the void, and reproduction can resume with a minimal loss of time. Furthermore, 
the new mate has already proved its ability to survive.  
This transformation of a male into a female, or protandrous hermaphroditism, is rare 
among reef fish. The more common protogynous hermaphroditism, where females change into 
males, does not occur among clown fish. An intriguing question for further research is whether 
a juvenile clown fish can turn directly into a female or whether it must f unction first as a male.  
17. The passage is primarily concerned  with 
(A) analyzing the mutually advantageous  relationship between two species  
(B) comparing two forms of  hermaphroditism among clown fish  
(C) describing and explaining aspects  of clown -fish be havior  
(D) outlining proposed research on  clown -fish reproduction  
(E) attempting to reconcile  inconsistent observations of  clown -fish development  
18. It can be inferred from the passage  that the clown fish is able to survive in close 
association with the sea anemone because the  
(A) sea anemone cannot detect the  prese nce of the clown fish  
(B) tentacles of the sea anemone cannot  grasp the slippery clown fish  
(C) sea anemone prefers other prey  
(D) clown fish does not actually come  within the range of the sea anemone s 
tentacles  
(E) clown fish has developed tolerance t o the sea anemone s poison  
19. According to the passage, adult clown  fish would be at a disadvantage if they  
were not associated with sea anemones because the clown fish would  
(A) be incapable of sexual transformation   GRE  647 
 (B) be vulnerable to predators  
(C) hav e no reliable source of food  
(D) have to lay their eggs in the open  
(E) face competition from other clown fish  
20. It can be inferred from the passage  that sex change would have been less  
necessary for the clown fish if  
(A) the male clown fish were larger than  the female  
(B) each sea anemone were occupied by  several va rieties of clown fish  
(C) many mature clown fish of both sexes  occupied each sea anemone  
(D) juvenile clown fish had a high  mortality rate  
(E) both male clown fish and female clown  fish were highly territorial  
21. The author mentions all of the  followin g as characteristic of the rigidly defined 
hierarchy  (line 8) of the clown -fish community EXCEPT:  
(A) At any time only one female clown fish can be reproductively active  
(B) The mature clown fish are monogamous  
(C) The growth of clown fish is synchronize d 
(D) The maximum number of clown fish is fixed  
(E) There are equal numbers of male juveniles and female juveniles  
22. Which of the following statements  about newly hatched clown fish can be 
inferred from the passage?  
(A) They develop rapidly.  
(B) They remain close to the sea anemone  occupied by the ir parents.  
(C) They are more sensitive to chemical  signals than are adult clown fish.  
(D) They are not protected by their  parents.  
(E) They are less vulnerable to predation  than are adult fish.  
23. Which of the following, if true, would be LEAST consis tent with the author s 
explanation of the advantage of hermaphroditism for clown fish?  
(A) The number of individuals in a  clown -fish community fluctuates  significantly.  
(B) Adult clown fish frequently  cannibalize their young.  
(C) The sea anemone tolerates clown fish  only during a specific stage of the  
anemone s life cycle.  
(D) Juvenile clown fish rarely reach  maturity.  
(E) Clown -fish communities are capable of  efficiently recruiting solitary adult  
clown fish.  
Comparing designs in music with visual designs raises interesting questions. We are 
familiar with the easy transfers of terms denoting qualities from one field to another. The basic 
problem can be put this way: can music sound the way a design looks? The elements of music 
are not the same as those of painting. They may be analogous, but to be analogous is not to be 648 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 identical. Is it possible, then, for the same br oad characteristics to emerge from  different 
perceptual conditions?  
Two facts about the relation between broad characteristics of a work and their perceptual 
conditions must be kept distinct. First, the global characteristics of a visual or  auditory complex 
are determined by the dis cernible parts and their relationships. Thus, any notable change in the 
parts or their relationships produces a change in some of the global characteristics. Second, a 
change in the parts or their relationships may leave other global characteristics  unchan ged. 
24. In the first paragraph , the author is  primarily concerned with establishing  the fact 
that 
(A) comparisons are not equations  
(B) auditory phenomena are not visual  phenomena  
(C) frequently used comparisons are  usually inaccurate  
(D) careless percept ions result from  careless thought  
(E) questions concerning perception are  psychological  
25. In the passage, the author is  primarily concerned with  
(A) distinguishing mutually exclusive categories  
(B) clarifying an apparent contradiction  
(C) supporting n ew ideas  
(D) analyzing a problem  
(E) comparing opinions  
26. The second paragraph is primarily  concerned with establishing the idea  that 
(A) different global characteristics of a  work result from the same discernible  
parts  
(B) the parts of a work of art influence  the total perception of the work  
(C) visual and auditory characteristics  can be combined  
(D) changes in the parts of a work remain  isolated from the work as a whole  
(E) the visual complexes in a work of art  influence the work s auditory comple xes 
27. Which of the following statements is  most likely be a continuation of the  
passage?  
(A) The search for broad similarities  thus begins by understanding and  
distinguishing these two facts.  
(B) The search for musical -visual analogies thus depends on th e complexity  of 
the works being compared.  
(C) The search for music and art of the  highest quality thus depends on very  
different assumptions.  
(D) Thus music and painting exist in  mutually exclusive worlds.  
(E) Thus music and painting are too  complicated to be evaluated in terms of  
analogies .  GRE  649 
 1997 11   
SECTION A  
Investigators of monkeys  social behavior have always  been struck by monkeys  aggressive 
potential and the consequent need for social control of their aggressive behavior. Studies 
directed at describing aggressive behavior and the situations that elicit it, as well as the social 
mechanisms that control it, were therefore among the first investigations of monkeys  social 
behavior.  
Investigators init ially believed that monkeys would compete for any resource in the 
environment: hungry monkeys would fight over food, thirsty monkeys would fight over water, 
and, in general, any time more than one monkey in a group sought the same incentive 
simultaneously,  a dispute would result and would be resolved through some form of aggression. 
However, the motivating force of competition for incentives began to be doubted when 
experiments like Southwick s on the reduction of space or the withholding of food failed to 
produce more than temporary increases in intragroup aggression. Indeed, food deprivation not 
only failed to increase aggression but in some cases actually resulted in decreased frequencies 
of aggression.  
Studies of animals in the wild under conditions of  extreme food deprivation likewise 
revealed that starving monkeys devoted almost all available energy to foraging, with little 
energy remaining for aggressive interaction. Furthermore, accumulating evidence from later 
studies of a variety of primate groups, for example, the study conducted by Bernstein, indicates 
that one of the most potent stimuli for eliciting aggression is the introduction of an intruder into 
an organized group. Such introductions result in far more serious aggression than that 
produced in  any other types of experiments contrived to produce com petition.  
These studies of intruders suggest that adult members of the same species introduced to 
one another for the first time show considerable hostility because, in the absence of a social 
order, one must be established to control interanimal relationships. When a single new animal is 
introduced into an existing social organization, the newcomer meets even more serious 
aggression. Whereas in the first case aggression establishes a social order, in the second case 
resident animals mob the intruder, thereby  initially excluding the new animal from the existing 
social  unit. The simultaneous introduction of several animals lessens the effect, if only because  
the group divides its attention among the multiple targets. If, however, the several animals 
introduced to a group constitute their own social unit, each group may fight the opposing group 
as a unit; but, again, no individual is subjected to mass attack, and  the very cohesion of the 
groups precludes prolonged individual combat. The submission of the defeated group, rather 
than unleashing unchecked aggression on the part of  the victorious group, reduces both t he 
intensity and frequency of further attack. Monkey groups  therefo re see to be organized 
primarily to maintain their established social order rather than to engage in hostilities per se.  
17. The author of the passage is primarily concerned wit h 
(A) advanc ing a new methodology for changing a monkey s social behavior  
(B) comparing the methods of several research studies on  aggression among 650 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 monkeys  
(C) explaining the reasons for researchers  interest in monkeys  social behavior  
(D) discussing the development of investigators  theories about aggression among 
monkeys  
(E) examining the effects of competition on monkeys  social behavior  
18. Which of the following best summarizes the findings reported in the passage 
about the effects of food deprivation on monke ys behavior?  
(A) Food deprivation has no effect on aggression among monkeys.  
(B) Food deprivation increases aggression among monkeys because one of the 
most potent stimuli for eliciting aggression is the competition for incentives.  
(C) Food deprivation ma y increase long -term aggression among monkeys in a 
laboratory setting, but it produces only temporary increases among monkeys 
in the wild.  
(D) Food deprivation may temporarily increase aggression among monkeys, but it 
also leads to a decrease in conflict.  
(E) Food deprivation decreases the intensity but not the frequency of aggressive 
incidents among  monkey.  
19. According to the author, studies such as Southwick s had which of the following 
effects on investigators  theories about monkeys  social behavi or? 
(A) They suggested that existing theories about the role of aggression among 
monkeys did not fully account for the monkeys  ability to maintain an 
established social order.  
(B) They confirmed investigators  theories about monkeys  aggressive response t o 
competition for food and water.  
(C) They confirmed investigators  beliefs about the motivation for continued 
aggression among monkeys in the same social group.  
(D) They disproved investigators  theory that the introduction of intruders in an 
organized mo nkey group elicits intragroup aggressive behavior.  
(E) They cast doubt on investigators  theories that could account for observed 
patterns of aggression among monkeys.  
20. The passage suggests that investigators of monkeys social behavior have been 
especially interested in aggressive behavior among monkeys because  
(A) aggression is the most common social behavior among monkeys  
(B) successful competition for incentives determines the social order in a monkey 
group  
(C) situations that elicit aggressive beh avior can be studied in a laboratory  
(D) most monkeys are potentially aggressive, yet they live in social units that 
could not function without control of their aggressive impulses  
(E) most monkeys are social, yet they frequently respond to newcomers entering  GRE  651 
 existing social units by attacking them  
21. It can be inferred from the passage that the establishment and preservation of 
social order among a group of monkeys is essential  in order to  
(A) keep the monkeys from straying and joining other groups  
(B) control aggressive behavior among group members  
(C) prevent the domination of that group by another  
(D) protect individuals seeking to become members of that group from mass 
attac k 
(E) prevent aggressive competition for incentives between that group and another  
22. The passage supplies information to answer which of the following questions?  
(A) How does the reduction of space affect intragroup aggression among 
monkeys in an exper imental setting?  
(B) Do family units within a monkey social group compete with other family 
units for food?  
(C) What are the mechanisms by which the social order of an established group of 
monkeys controls aggression within that group?  
(D) How do monkeys e ngaged in aggression with other monkeys signal 
submission?  
(E) Do monkeys of different species engage in aggression with each other over 
food?  
23. Which of the following best describes the organization of the second paragraph?  
(A) A hypothesis is explained and counter evidence is described.  
(B) A theory is adv anced and specific evidence supporting it  is cited.  
(C) Field observations are described and a conclusion about their significance is 
drawn.  
(D) Two theories are explained and evidence supporting  each of them is detailed.  
(E) An explanation of a general  principle is stated and specific examples of its 
operation are given.  
Analysis of prehistoric air trapped in tiny bubbles beneath the polar ice sheets and of the 
composition of ice surrounding those bubbles suggests a correlation between carbon dioxide 
levels in the Earth s atmosphere and global temperature over the last 160,000 years. Estimates 
of global  temperature at the time air in the bubbles was trapped rely on measuring the relative 
abundances of hydrogen and its heavier isotope, deuterium, in the i ce surrounding the bubbles. 
When global temperatures are relatively low, water containing deuterium tends to condense 
and precipitate before reaching the poles; thus, ice deposited at the poles when the global 
temperature was cooler contained relatively le ss deuterium than ice deposited at warmer global 
temperatures. Estimates of global temperature based on this information, combined with 
analysis of the carbon dioxide content of air trapped in ice deep beneath the polar surface, 
suggest that during periods  of postglacial warming carbon dioxide in the Earth s atmosphere 
increased by approximately 40 percent.  652 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 24. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with doing which of the 
following?  
(A) Describing a new method of estimating decreases in global t emperature that 
have occurred over the last 160,000 years  
(B) Describing a method of analysis that provides information regarding the 
relation between the carbon dioxide content of the Earth s atmosphere and 
global temperature  
(C) Presenting information th at suggests that global temperature has increased 
over the last 160,000 years  
(D) Describing the kinds of information that can be gleaned from a careful 
analysis of the contents of sheets  
(E) Demonstrating the difficulty of arriving at a firm conclusion  regarding how 
increases in the amount of carbon dioxide in the Earth s atmosphere affect 
global temperature  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that during periods of postglacial warming, 
which of the following occurred?  
(A) The total volume of air tr apped in bubbles beneath the polar ice sheets 
increased.  
(B) The amount of deuterium in ice deposited at the poles increased.  
(C) Carbon dioxide levels in the Earth atmosphere decreased.  
(D) The amount of hydrogen in the Earth s atmosphere  decreased relati vely the 
amount of deuterium.  
(E) The rate at which ice was deposited at the poles increased.  
26. The author states that there is evidence to support which of the following 
assertions?  
(A) Estimates of global temperature that rely on measurements of deu terium in 
ice deposited at the poles are more reliable than those based on the amount 
of carbon dioxide contained in air bubbles beneath the polar surface.  
(B) The amount of deuterium in the Earth s atmosphere tends to increase as 
global temperature decrea ses. 
(C) Periods of postglacial warming are characterized by the presence of increased 
levels of carbon dioxide in the Earth s atmosphere.  
(D) Increases in global temperature over the last 160,000 years are largely the 
result of increases in the ratio of d euterium to hydrogen in the Earth s 
atmosphere.  
(E) Increases in global temperature over the last 160,000 years have been 
accompanied by decreases in the amount of deuterium in the ice deposited at 
the poles.  
27. It can be inferred from the passage that  the conclusion stated in the last sentence 
would need to be reevaluated if scientists discovered that which of the following  GRE  653 
 were true?  
(A) The amount of deuterium in ice deposited on the polar surface is significantly 
greater than the amount of deuterium  in ice located deep beneath the polar 
surface.  
(B) Both the air bubbles trapped deep beneath the polar surface and the ice 
surrounding them contain relatively low levels of deuterium.  
(C) Air bubbles trapped deep beneath the polar surface and containing r elatively 
high levels of carbon dioxide are surrounded by ice that contained relatively 
low levels of deuterium.  
(D) The current level of carbon dioxide in the Earth s atmosphere exceeds the 
level of carbon dioxide in the prehistoric air trapped beneath th e polar 
surface.  
(E) Increases in the level of carbon dioxide in the Earth s atmosphere are 
accompanied by increases in the amount of deuterium in the ice deposited at 
the poles.  
SECTION B 
Bracken fern has been spreading from its woodland strongholds  for centuries, but the rate 
of encroachment into open countryside has lately increased alarmingly throughout northern 
and western Britain. A tough competitor, bracken reduces the value of grazing land by crowding 
out other vegetation. The fern is itse lf poisonous to livestock, and also encourages proliferation 
of sheep ticks, which not only attack sheep but also transmit diseases. No less important to 
some people are bracken s effects on threatened habitats and on the use of uplands for 
recreational pu rposes, even though many appreciate its beauty.  
Biological controls may be the only economic solution. One potentially cheap and 
self-sustaining method of halting the spread of bracken is to introduce natural enemies of the 
plant. Initially unrestrained by  predators of their own, foreign predators are likely to be able to 
multiply rapidly and overwhelm intended targets. Because bracken occurs throughout the world, 
there is plenty of scope for this  approach. Two candidates, both moths from the Southern 
Hemis phere, are now being studied.  
Of course, biological control agents can safely be released only if it can be verified that 
they feed solely on the target weed. The screening tests have so far been fraught with  
difficulties. The first large shipment of moths  succumbed to a disease. Growing enough bracken 
indoors is difficult, and the moths do not readily exploit cut stems. These are common problems 
with rearing insects for biological control.  
Other problems can be foreseen. Policymakers need to consider many factors and opinions 
such as the cost of  control compared to existing methods, and the impact of the clearance of 
bracken on the landscape, wildlife, and vegetation. In fact, scientists already have much of the 
information needed to assess the impact of bi ological control of bracken, but it is spread among 
many individuals, organizations, and government bodies. The potential gains for the 
environment are likely to outweigh the losses because few plants, insects, mammals, and birds 
live associated only with bracken, and many would benefit from a return of other vegetation or 654 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 from a more diverse mosaic of habitats. But legal consequences of attempts at biological 
control present a potential minefield. For example, many rural tenants still have the right of 
estoyers,  the right to cut bracken as bedding for livestock and uses. What would happen if 
they were deprived of these rights? Once a biological control agent is released, it is difficult to 
control its speed. What consideration is due landowners who do not  want to control bracken? 
According to law, the release of the biological control agents must be authorized by the 
secretary of state  for the environment. But Britain lacks the legal and administrative machinery 
to assemble evidence for and against release.  
17. Which of the following best states the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Studies suggest that biological  control of bracken will not be technically 
feasible.  
(B) Although biological control appears to be the best solution to bracken 
infestation, careful assessment of the consequences is required.  
(C) Environmentalists are hoping that laboratory technicians w ill find a way to 
raise large numbers of moths in captivity.  
(D) Bracken is currently the best solution to the proliferation of nonnative moth 
species.  
(E) Even after researchers discover the most economical method of pest control, 
the government has no authority to implement a control program.  
18. According to the passage, which of the following can be inferred about sheep 
ticks?  
(A) They increase wh ere bracken spreads.  
(B) They are dangerous only to sheep.  
(C) They are especially adapted to woodland.  
(D) They have no natural enemies.  
(E) They cause disease among bracken.  
19. The author cites all of the following as disadvantages of bracken encroac hment 
EXCEPT:  
(A) Bracken is poisonous to farm animals.  
(B) Bracken inhibits the growth of valuable vegetation.  
(C) Bracken indirectly helps spread certain diseases.  
(D) Bracken is aesthetically objectionable.  
(E) Bracken disturbs habitats that some peo ple would like to protect.  
20. The final paragraph can best be described as  
(A) a summation of arguments presented in previous paragraphs  
(B) the elimination of competing arguments to strengthen a single remaining 
conclusion  
(C) an enumeration of advantage s to biological control  
(D) an expansion of the discussion from the particular example of bracken control  GRE  655 
 to the general problem of government regulation  
(E) an overview of the variety of factors requiring further assessment  
21. It can be inferred from the passage that it is advantageous to choose as the 
biological control agent a predator that is foreign to the targeted environment for 
which of the fol lowing reasons?  
(A) Conservation groups prefer not to favor one native species over another.  
(B) All local predators have already been overwhelmed by the target species.  
(C) Local predators cannot be effectively screened since they already exist in the 
wild. 
(D) There is little risk of an artificially introduced foreign predator multiplying 
out of control.  
(E) Native predator species are generally limited by their own predators.  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that the screening tests performed on the 
biological control agent are designed primarily to determine  
(A) its effectiveness in eliminatin g the target species  
(B) the response of local residents to its introduction  
(C) the risk it poses to species other than the target  
(D) its resistance to the stress of shipment  
(E) the likelihood of its survival indoors  
23. As it is discussed in the pas sage, the place of bracken within the forest habitat can 
best be described as  
(A) rapidly expanding  
(B) the subject of controversy  
(C) well established  
(D) circumscribed by numerous predators  
(E) a significant nutrient source  
Allen and Wolkowitz s resea rch challenges the common claim that homework waged 
labor performed at home for a company is primarily a response to women workers  needs and 
preferences. By focusing on a limited geographical area in order to gather in -depth information, 
the authors have avoided the methodological pitfalls that have plagued earlier research on 
homework. Their findings disprove accepted notions about homeworkers: that they are 
unqualified for other jobs and that they use homework as a short -term strategy for dealing with 
child care.  
The authors conclude that the persistence of homework cannot be explained by appeal to 
such notions, for, in fact, homeworkers do not differ sharply from other employed women. Most 
homeworkers would prefer to work outside the home but are constra ined from doing so by lack 
of opportunity. In fact, homework is driven by employers  desires to minimize fixed costs: 
homeworkers receive no benefits and are paid less than regular employees.  
24. The passage is primarily concerned with  656 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) advocating a con troversial theory  
(B) presenting and challenging the results of a study  
(C) describing a problem and proposing a solution  
(D) discussing research that opposes a widely accepted belief  
(E) comparing several explanations for the same phenomenon  
25. Accord ing to the passage, which of the following has been generally believed 
about homework?  
(A) The benefits of homework accrue primarily to employers rather than to 
homeworkers.  
(B) Homework is prevalent predominantly in rural areas.  
(C) Homework is primarily a response to the preferences of women workers.  
(D) Few homeworkers rely on homework for the majority of their family income.  
(E) Most homework is seasonal and part -time rather than full -time and 
year-round.  
26. Allen and Wolkowitz s research suggests that each of the following is true of 
most homeworkers EXCEPT:  
(A) They do not necessarily resort to homework as a strategy fo r dealing with 
child care.  
(B) Their family situations are not unlike those of other employed women.  
(C) They are as well qualified as women who work outside the home.  
(D) They perform professional -level duties rather than manual tasks or 
piecework.  
(E) They do not prefer homework to employment outside the home.  
27. The passage suggests which of the following about previous research on 
homework?  
(A) It was conducted primarily with women who did not have extensive 
household responsibilities or care for sm all children at home.  
(B) It was conducted with homeworkers and companies over a large geographical 
area.  
(C) It indicated that women homeworkers had numerous opportunities to work 
outside the home.  
(D) It indicated that homeworkers usually work for compan ies that are close to 
their homes.  
(E) It indicated that homework was financially advantageous to large companies.  
1998 04   
SECTION A   GRE  657 
 Much of the research on hallucinogenic drugs such as LSD has focused on the 
neurotransmitter serotonin, a chemical that when released from a presynaptic  
serotonin -secreting neuron causes the transmission of a nerve impulse across a synapse to an 
adjacent postsynaptic, or target, neuron. There are two major reasons for this emphasis. First, 
it was discovered early on  that many of the major hallucinogens have a molecular structure 
similar to that of serotonin. In addition, animal studies of brain neurochemistry following 
administration of hallucinogens invariably reported changes in serotonin levels.  
Early investig ators correctly reasoned that the structural similarity to the serotonin 
molecule might imply that LSD s effects are brought about by an action on the 
neurotransmission of serotonin in the brain. Unfortunately, the level of technical expertise in the 
field of brain research was such that this hypothesis had to be tested on peripheral tissue 
(tissue outside the brain). Two different groups of scientists reported that LSD powerfully 
blockaded serotonin s action. Their conclusions were quickly challenged, howe ver. We now 
know that the action of a drug at one site in the body does not necessarily correspond to the 
drugs action at another site, especially when one site is in the brain and the other is not.  
By the 1960 s, technical advances permitted the direct t esting of the hypothesis that LSD 
and related hallucinogens act by directly suppressing the activity of serotonin -secreting neurons 
themselves the so -called presynaptic hypothesis. Researchers reasoned that if the 
hallucinogenic drugs act by suppressing th e activity of serotonin -secreting neurons, then drugs 
administered after these neurons had been destroyed should have no effect on behavior, 
because the system would already be maximally suppressed. Contrary to their expectation s, 
neuron destruction enhanc ed the effect of LSD and related hallucinogens on behavior. Thus, 
hallucinogenic drugs apparently do not act directly on serotonin -secreting neurons.  
However, these and other available data do support an alternative hypothesis that LSD and 
related drugs ac t directly at receptor sites on serotonin target neurons (the postsynaptic 
hypothesis). The fact that LSD elicits serotonin syndrome that is, causes the same kinds of 
behaviors as does the administration of serotonin in animals whose brains are depleted of 
serotonin indicates that LSD acts directly on serotonin receptors, rather than indirectly through 
the release of stores of serotonin. The enhanced effect of LSD reported after serotonin 
depletion could be due to a proliferation of serotonin receptor sit es on serotonin target neurons. 
This phenomenon often follows neuron destruction or neurotransmitter depletion; the increase 
in the number of receptor sites appears to be a compensatory response to decreased input. 
Significantly, this hypothesis is support ed by data from a number of different laboratories.  
17. According to the passage, which of the following is one of the primary factors 
that led researchers studying hallucinogenic drugs to focus on serotonin?  
(A) The suppression of the activity of serotoni n-secreting neurons by the 
administration of hallucinogens  
(B) The observed similarities in the chemical structures of serotonin and 
hallucinogens  
(C) The effects the administration of hallucinogens has on serotonin production in 
the human brain  
(D) Seroto nin-induced changes in the effects of hallucinogens on behavior  658 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (E) Hallucinogen -induced changes in the effects of serotonin on behavior  
18. It can be inferred that researchers abandoned the presynaptic hypothesis because  
(A) a new and more attractive hypothesis was suggested  
(B) no research was reported that suppo rted the hypothesis  
(C) research results provided evidence to counter the hypothesis  
(D) the hypothesis was supported only by studies of animals and not by studies of 
human beings  
(E) the level of technical expertise in the field of brain research did n ot perm it 
adequate testing of the hypothesis  
19. Which of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Research has suggested that the neurotransmitter serotonin is responsible for 
the effects of hallucinogenic dr ugs on the brain and on b ehavior.  
(B) Researchers have spent an inadequate amount  of time developing theories 
concerning the way in which the effects of hallucinogenic drugs occur.  
(C) Research results strongly suggest that hallucinogenic drugs create their effects 
by acting on th e serotonin receptor sites located on target neurons in the 
brain.  
(D) Researchers have recently made valuable discoveries concerning the effects 
of depleting the amount of serotonin in the brain.  
(E) Researchers have concluded that hallucinogenic drugs  suppress the activity of 
serotonin -secreting neurons.  
20. The research described in the passage is primarily concerned with answering 
which of the following questions?  
(A) How can researchers control the effects that LSD has on behavior?  
(B) How are anima ls reaction s to LSD different from those of human beings?  
(C) What triggers the effects that LSD has on human behavior?  
(D) What technical advances would permit researchers to predict more accurately 
the effects of LSD on behavior?  
(E) What relationship does the suppression of neuron activity have to the 
occurrence of serotonin syndrome ? 
21. Which of the following best defines serotonin syndrome  (line 46) as the term is 
used in the passage?  
(A) The series of behaviors, usuall y associated with the administration of 
serotonin, that also occurs when LSD is administered to animals whose 
brains are depleted of serotonin  
(B) The series of behaviors, usually associated with the administration of LSD, 
that also occurs when the amount of serotonin in the brain is reduced  
(C) The maximal suppression of neuron activity that results from the destruction 
of serotonin -secreting neurons   GRE  659 
 (D) The release of stores of serotonin from serotonin -secreting neurons in the 
brain  
(E) The proliferation of serotonin receptor sites that follows depletion of 
serotonin supplies in the brain  
22. Which of the following best describes the organization of the argument that the 
author of the passage presents in the last two paragraphs?  
(A) Two approaches to testing a hypothesis are described, and the greater merits 
of one approach are indicated.  
(B) The assumptions underlying two hypotheses are outlined, and evidence for 
and against each hypothesis is discussed.  
(C) A phenomenon is descri bed, and hypotheses concerning its occurrence are 
considered and rejected.  
(D) The reasoning behind a hypothesis is summarized, evidence supporting the 
hypothesis is presented, and research that counters the supporting evidence 
is described.  
(E) A hypothesis is discussed, evidence undermining the hypothesis is revealed, 
and a further hypothesis based on the undermining evidence is explained.  
23. The author s attitude toward early researchers  reasoning concerning the 
implications of simila rities in the structures of serotonin and LSD  molecules can 
best be described as one of  
(A) complete agreement  
(B) reluctant support  
(C) subtle condescension  
(D) irreverent dismissal  
(E) strong opposition  
When literary periods are defined on the basis o f men s writing, women s writing must be 
forcibly assimilated into an irrelevant grid: a Renaissance that is not a renaissance for women, a 
Romantic period in which women played very little part, a modernism with which women 
conflict. Simultaneously, the h istory of women s writing has been suppressed, leaving large, 
mysterious gaps in accounts of the development of various genres. Feminist criticism is 
beginning to correct this situation. Margaret Anne Doody, for example, suggests that during 
the period be tween the death of Richardson and the appearance of the novels of Scott and 
Austen,  which has been regarded as a dead period , late-eighteenth -century women writers 
actually developed the paradigm for women s fiction of the nineteenth century something 
hardly less than the paradigm of the nineteenth -century novel itself.  Feminist critics have also 
pointed out that the twentieth -century writer Virginia Woolf belonged to a tradition other than 
modernism and that this tradition surfaces in her work precise ly where criticism has hitherto 
found obscurities, evasions, implausibilities, and  imperfection s. 
24. It can be inferred from the passage that the author views the division of literature 
into periods based on men s writing as an approach that  660 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) makes dis tinctions among literary periods ambiguous  
(B) is appropriate for evaluating only pr emodern literature  
(C) was misunderstood until the advent of feminist criticism  
(D) provides a valuable basis from which feminist criticism has evolved  
(E) obscures women s contributions to literature  
25. The passage suggests which of the following about Virginia Woolf s work?  
I. Nonfeminist criticism of it has been flawed.  
II. Critics have treated it as part of modernism.  
III. It is based on the work  of late -eighteenth -century women writers.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) I and II only  
(D) II and III only  
(E) I, II and III  
26. The author quotes Doody most probably in order to illustrate  
(A) a contribution that feminist criticism can make to literary cr iticism  
(B) a modernist approach that conflicts with women s writing  
(C) writing by a woman which had previously been ignored  
(D) the hitherto overlooked significance of Scott s and Austen s novels  
(E) a standard system of defining literary periods  
27. The passage provides information that answers which of the following questions?  
(A) In what tradition do feminist critics usually place Virginia Woolf?  
(B) What are the main themes of women s fiction of the nineteenth century?  
(C) What events motivated the  feminist reinterpretation of literary history?  
(D) How has the period between Richardson s death and Scott s and Austen s 
novels traditionally been regarded by critics?  
(E) How was the development of the nineteenth -century novel affected by 
women s fiction in the same century?  
SECTION B 
The origin of the theory that major geologic events  may occur at regular intervals can be 
traced back not  to a study of volcanism or plate tectonics but to an  investigation of marine 
extinctions. In the  early 1980 s, scientists began to look closely at the question of how  these 
extinctions occur. Two paleontologists, Raup and Sepkoski, compiled a master list of  marine 
species that died out during  the past 268 million years and noted that there  were brief periods 
during which  many species disappeared at once. These mass extinctions occurred at 
surprisingly regular intervals.  
Later studies revealed that extinctions of  terrestrial  reptiles and mammals also occurred  GRE  661 
 periodically. These findings, combined with the research of Raup  and Sepkoski, led scientists to 
hypothesize the  existence of some kind of cyclically recurring force powerful enough to affect 
living things profoundly. Speculation that so  powerful a force might affect  geologic events as 
well led geologists to search for  evidence of periodicity in episodes of volcanism, seafloor  
spreading, and plate movement.  
17. According to the passage, Raup and Sepkoski s research was concerned wi th 
(A) learning more about the habitats of marine species  
(B) studying plate tectonics and the occurrence of volcanism over the past 268 
million years  
(C) examining extinctions of marine species over the past 268 million years  
(D) finding out whether a rhy thmically recurring geologic force exists  
(E) confirming previous evidence suggesting that extinction of terrestrial species 
occurred regularly  
18. The author of the passage would most likely describe the findings of R aup and 
Sepkoski as  
(A) plausible, because the findings supported the theori es of previous researchers  
(B) significant, because the findings were an impetus for subsequent research  
(C) controversial, because the findings contradicted the theories of previous 
researchers  
(D) questionable, because the authors were not  working in the ir field of expertise  
(E) definitive, because the findings confirmed the existence of a rhythmically 
recurring force  
19. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) determining the dates of various geologic events  
(B) defending the conclusions reached by Raup and Sepkoski  
(C) establishing a link between the disciplines of paleontology and geology  
(D) proving that mass extinctions of marine animals occur period ically  
(E) explaining how a theory concerning geologic  events was formulated  
20. The passage suggest s which of the following about the force  mentioned in lines 
16 and 18?  
(A) It is responsible for most of the major geologic events that have occurred.  
(B) It is responsible for most of the marine extinctions that have occurred.  
(C) Its recurrence is unli kely to be able to be predicted by scientists.  
(D) Its existence was not seriously considered by scientists before Raup and 
Sepkoski did their research.  
(E) Its existence was confirmed by the research of Raup and Sepkoski.  
A recent history of the Chicago meat -packing  industry and its workers examines how the 
industry grew from its appearance in the 1830 s through the early 1890 s. Meat -packers, the 662 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 author argues, had good wages, working conditions, and prospects for advancement within the 
packinghouses, and did not cooperate with labor agitators since labor relations were so 
harmonious. Because the history maintains that conditions were above standard f or the era, 
the frequency of labor disputes, especially in the mid-1880s, is not accounted for. The work 
ignores the fact that the 1880 s were crucial years in American labor history, and that the 
packinghouse workers  efforts were part of the national mo vement for labor reform.  
In fact, other historical sources for the late nineteenth century record deteriorating housing 
and high disease and infant mortality rates in the industrial community, due to low wages and 
unhealthy working conditions. Additional d ata from the University of Chicago suggest that the 
packinghouses were dangerous places to work. The government investigation commissioned by 
President Theodore Roosevelt which eventually led to the adoption of the 1906  Meat Inspection 
Act found the packin ghouses unsanitary, while social workers observed that most of the 
workers were poorly paid and overworked. The history may be too optimistic because most of 
its data date from the 1880 s at the latest , and the information provided from that decade is 
insufficiently analyzed. Conditions actually declined in the 1880 s, and continued to decline after 
the 1880 s, due to a reorganization of the packing process and a massive influx of unskilled 
workers. The deterioration in worker status , partly a result of the new availability of unskilled 
and hence cheap labor, is not discussed. Though a detailed account of work in the 
packing -houses is attempted, the author fails to distinguish between the wages and conditions 
for skilled workers and f or those unskilled laborers who comprised the majority of the industry s 
workers from the 1880 s on. While conditions for the former were arguably tolerable due to the 
strategic importance of skilled  workers in the complicated slaughtering, cutting, and pa cking 
process (though worker complaints about the rate and conditions of work were frequent), pay 
and conditions for the latter were wretched.  
The author s misinterpretation of the origins of the feelings the meat -packers had for their 
industrial neighborh ood may account for the history s faulty generalizations. The pride and 
contentment the author remarks upon were, arguably, less the products of the industrial world 
of the packers the giant yards and  the intricate plants than of the unity and vibrance of the 
ethnic cultures that formed a viable community on Chicago s South Side. Indeed, the strength 
of this community succeeded in generating a social movement that effectively confronted the 
problems of the industry that provided its livelihood.  
21. The pass age is primarily concerned with discussing  
(A) how historians ought to explain the origins of the conditions in the Chicago 
meat -packing industry  
(B) why it is difficult to determine the actual nature of the conditions in the 
Chicago meat -packing industry  
(C) why a particular account of the conditions in the Chicago meat -packing 
industry  is inaccurate  
(D) what ought to be included in any account of the Chicago meat -packers  role 
in the national labor movement  
(E) what data are most relevant for an accurate account of the relations between 
Chicago meat -packers and local labor agitators   GRE  663 
 22. The author of the passage mentions all of the following as describing negative 
conditions in the meat -packing industry E XCEPT:  
(A) data from the University of Chicago  
(B) a recent history of the meat -packing industry  
(C) social workers  
(D) historical sources for the late nineteenth century  
(E) government records  
23. The author of the passage mentions the social movement  (line 57) generated by 
Chicago s South Side community primarily in order to  
(A) inform the reader of events that occurred in the meat -packing industry after 
the period of time covered by the history  
(B) suggest the history s limitations by pointing out a  situation that the history 
failed to explain adequately  
(C) salvage the history s point of view by suggesting that there were positive 
developments in the meat -packing industry due to worker unity  
(D) introduce a new issue designed to elaborate on the goo d relationship between 
the meat -packers and Chicago s ethnic communities  
(E) suggest that the history should have focused more on the general issue of the 
relationship between labor movements and healthy industrial communities  
24. According to the passa ge, the working conditions of skilled workers in the 
meat -packing industry during the 1880 s were influenced by  
(A) the workers  determined complaints about the rate and conditions of their 
work  
(B) the efforts of social workers to improve sanitation in th e packinghouses  
(C) the workers  ability to perform the industry s complex tasks  
(D) improvements in the industry s packing process that occurred in the 1880 s 
(E) opportunities for job advancement due to the filling of less desirable positions 
by increasing numbers of unskilled workers  
25. The author of the passage uses the second paragraph to  
(A) summarize the main point of the history discussed in the pass age 
(B) explain why the history discussed in the passage has been disparaged by 
critics  
(C) evaluate the findings of recent studies that undermine the premises of the 
history discussed in the passage  
(D) introduce a hypothesis that will be discussed in det ail later in the passage  
(E) present evidence that is intended to refute the argument of the history 
discussed in the passage  
26. The tone of the author of the passage in discussing the meat -packer community 664 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 on Chicago s South Side can best be described as one of  
(A) appreciat ion of the community s ability to cope with difficult conditions  
(B) admiration for the community s refusal to cooperate with labor agitators  
(C) indignation at the kinds of social conditions the community faced  
(D) annoyance at the community s inability t o abolish discrimination in the 
meat -packing industry  
(E) concern that the meat -packers  feelings for their community have not been 
documented  
27. The information in the passage suggests that the author of the history discussed in 
the passage made which of the following errors?  
(A) Failing to recognize th e effect of the diversity of the South Side community 
on the meat -packers  efforts to reform the industry  
(B) Attributing good working conditions in the meat -packing industry to the 
efforts of labor agitators  
(C) Overemphasizing the importance of the avail ability of unskilled labor as an 
influence  on conditions in the meat  packing industry  
(D) Interpreting the meat -packers  feelings for their community as appreciation of 
their industry  
(E) Failing to observe the pride and contentment felt by the meat -packers  
1998 11   
SECTION A  
(This passage is from a book published in 1960 .) 
When we consider great painters of the past, the study of art and the study of illusion 
cannot always be sepa rated. By illusion I mean those contrivances of color, line, shape, and so 
forth that lead us to see marks on a flat surface as depicting three -dimensional objects in space. 
I must emphasize that I am not making a plea, disguised or othe rwise, for the exercise of 
illusionist tricks in painting today, although I am, in fact, rather critical of certain theories of 
non-representational art. But to argue over  these theories would be to miss the point . That the 
discoveries and effects of representation that were the pride of earlier artists have become 
trivial today I would not deny for a moment . Yet I believe that we are in real danger of losing 
contact with past masters if we accept the fashionable doctrine that such matters never had 
anything to do with art. The very reason why the representation of nature can now be 
considered something commonplace should be of the greatest interest to art historians. Never 
before has there b een an age when the visual image was so cheap in every sense of the word. 
We are surrounded and assailed by posters and advertisements, comics  and magazine 
illustratio ns. We see aspects of reality represented on television, postage stamps, and food 
packages. Painting is taught in school and practiced as a pastime, and many modest amateurs 
have mastered tricks that would have looked like sheer magic to the fourteenth -century painter  GRE  665 
 Giotto . Even the crude colored renderings on a cereal box might have made Giottos 
contemporaries gasp. Perhaps there are people who conclude from this that the cereal box is 
superior to a Giotto; I do not. But I think that the victory and vulgarization  of representational 
skills create a problem for both art historians and critics.  
In this connection  it is instructive to remember the G reek saying that to marvel is the 
beginning of knowledge and if we cease to marvel we may be in danger of ceasing to know. I 
believe we must restore our sense of wonder at the capacity to conjure up by forms, lines, 
shades, or colors those mysterious phant oms of visual reality we call pictures. Even comics 
and advertisements, rightly viewed, provide food for thought . Just as the study of poetry 
remains incomplete without an awareness of the language of prose, so, I believe, the study of 
art will be increasingly supplemented by inquiry into the linguistics of the visual image. The 
way the language of art refers  to the visible world is both so obvious and so mysterious that it 
is still largely unknown except to artists, who use it as we use all language without needing to 
know its grammar and semantics.  
17. The author of the passage explicitly disagrees  with whic h of the following 
statements  
(A) In modern society even nonartists can master techniques that great artists of 
the fourteenth century did not employ.  
(B) The ability to represent a three -dimensional object on a flat surface has 
nothing to do with art.  
(C) In modern society the victory of representational skills has created a problem 
for art critics.  
(D) The way that artists are able to represent the visible world is an area that 
needs a great deal more study before it can be fully understood.  
(E) Moder n painters do not frequently make use of illusionist tricks in their work.  
18. The author suggests which of the following about art historians?  
(A) They do not believe that illusionist tricks have become trivial.  
(B) They generally spend little time studyi ng contemporary artists.  
(C) They have not given enough consideration to how the representation of nature 
has become commonplace.  
(D) They generally tend to argue about theories rather than address substantive 
issues.  
(E) They are less likely than art critics to study comics or advertisements.  
19. Which of the following best states the authors attitude toward comics, as 
expressed in the passage?  
(A) They constitute an innovative art form.  
(B) They can be a worthwhi le subject for study.  
(C) They are critically important to an understanding of modem art.  
(D) Their  visual structure is more complex than that of medieval art.  
(E) They can be understood best if they are examined in conjunction with  666 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 advertisements.  
20. The authors statement regarding how artists use the language of art (lines 48 -52) 
implies that  
(A) artists are better equipped than are art historians to provide detailed 
evaluations of other artists work  
(B) many artist s have an unusually quick, intuitive understanding of language  
(C) artists can produce works of art even if they cannot analyze their methods of 
doing so  
(D) artists of the past, such as Giotto, were better educated about artistic issues 
than were artists of the authors time  
(E) most artists probably consider the processes involved in their work to be 
closely akin to those involved in writing poetry  
21. The passage asserts which of the following about commercial art?  
(A) There are many examples of commercial art whose arti stic merit is equal to 
that of great works of art of the past.  
(B) Commercial art is heavily influenced by whatever doctrines are fashionable in 
the serious art world of the time.  
(C) The line between commercial art and great art lies primarily in how an i mage 
is used, not in the motivation for its creation.  
(D) The level of technical skill required to produce representational imagery in 
commercial art and in other kinds of art cannot be compared.  
(E) The pervasiveness of contemporary commercial art has led art historians to 
undervalue representational skills.  
22. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about the adherents of 
certain theories of nonrepresentational art (lines 9 -10)? 
(A) They consider the use of illusion to be inappropriate in contemporary art.  
(B) They do not agree that marks on a flat surface can ever satisfactorily convey 
the illusion of three -dimensional space.  
(C) They do not discuss important works of art c reated in the past.  
(D) They do not think that the representation of nature was ever the primary goal 
of past painters.  
(E) They concern themselves more with types of art such as advertisements and 
magazine illustrations than with traditional art.  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that someone who wanted to analyze the 
grammar and semantics (line 52) of the lang uage of art would most 
appropriately comment on which of the following?  
(A) The relationship between the drawings in a comic strip and the accompanying 
text 
(B) The amount of detail that can be included in a tiny illustration on a postage  GRE  667 
 stamp  
(C) The soc iological implications of the images chosen to advertise a particular 
product  
(D) The degree to which various colors used in different versions of the same 
poster would attract the attention of passersby  
(E) The particular juxtaposition of shapes in an illustration that makes one shape 
look as though it were behind another  
The 1973 Endangered Species Act made into legal policy the concept that endangered 
species of wildlife are precious as part of a na tural ecosystem. The nearly unanimous passage 
of this act in the United States Congress, reflecting the rising national popularity of 
environmentalism, masked a bitter debate. Affected industries clung to the former wildlife 
policy of valuing individual sp ecies according to their economic usefulness. They fought to 
minimize the laws impact by limiting definitions of key terms, but they lost on nearly every 
issue. The act defined wildlife as almost all kinds of animals from large mammals to 
invertebrates and plants. Taking wildlife was defined broadly as any action that threatened 
an endangered species; areas vital to a species survival could be federally protected as critical 
habitats. Though these definitions legislated strong environmentalist goals , political 
compromises made in the enforcement of the act were to determine just what economic 
interests would be set aside  for the sake of ecological stabilization.  
24. According to the passage, which of the following does the Endangered Species 
Act define as a critical habitat?  
(A) A natural eco system that is threatened by imminent development  
(B) An industrial or urban area in which wildlife species have almost ceased to 
live among humans  
(C) A natural area that is crucial to the survival of a species and thus eligible for 
federal protection  
(D) A wilderness area in which the taking of wildlife species is permitted rarely 
and only under strict federal regulation  
(E) A natural environment that is protected under law because its wildlife has a 
high economic value  
25. According to the passage, which of the following is an explanation for the degree 
of support that the Endangered Species Act received in Congress?  
(A) Concern for the environment had gained increasing national popularity.  
(B) Ecological research had created new economic opportunities dependent on 
the survival of certain species.  
(C) Congress had long wanted to change the existing wildlife policy.  
(D) The growth of industry had endangered increasing numbers of wildlife 
species.  
(E) Legislators did not anticipate that the act could be effectively enforced.  
26. It can be inferred from the passage that if business interests had won the debate 668 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 on provisions of the 1973 Endangered Species Act, which of the following would 
have res ulted?  
(A) Environmentalist concepts would not have become widely popular.  
(B) The definitions of key terms of the act would have been more restricted.  
(C) Enforcement of the act would have been more difficult.  
(D) The act would have had stronger support f rom Congressional leaders.  
(E) The public would have boycotted the industries that had the greatest impact in 
defining the act.  
27. The author refers to the terms wildlife (line 11), taking (line 13), and critical 
habitats (line 16) most likely in order to  
(A) illustrate t he misuse of scientific language and concepts in political processes  
(B) emphasize the importance of selecting precise language in transforming 
scientific concepts into law  
(C) represent terminology whose definition was crucial in writing 
environmentalist goals into law  
(D) demonstrate the triviality of the issues debated by industries before Congress 
passed the Endangered Species Act  
(E) show that broad definitions of key terms in many types of laws resulted in 
ambiguity and thus left room for disagreement about how the law should be 
enforced  
SECTION B 
From the 1900s through the 1950s waitresses in the United States developed a f orm of 
unionism based on the unions defining the skills that their occupation included and enforcing 
standards for the performance of those skills. This occupational unionism differed 
substantially from the worksite unionism prevalent among factory wo rkers. Rather than 
unionizing the workforces of particular employers, waitress locals  sought to control their 
occupation throughout a city. Occupational unionism operated through union hiring halls, which 
provided free placement  services to employers who agreed to hire their personnel only through 
the union. Hiring halls of fered union waitresses collective employment security, not individual 
job security a basic protection offered by worksite unions. That is, when a waitress lost her 
job, the local did not intervene with her employer but placed her elsewhere; and when jobs 
were scarce, the work hours available were distributed fairly among all members rather than 
being assigned according to seniority.  
17. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) analyze a current trend in relation to the past  
(B) discuss a particular solu tion to a longstanding problem  
(C) analyze changes in the way that certain standards have been enforced  
(D) apply a generalization to an unusual situation  
(E) describe an approach by contrasting it with another approach   GRE  669 
 18. Which of the following statem ents best summarizes a distinction mentioned in the 
passage between waitress unions and factory workers unions?  
(A) Waitress unions were more successful than factory workers unions in that 
they were able to unionize whole cities.  
(B) Waitress unions had an impact on only certain local areas, whereas the impact 
of factory workers unions was national.  
(C) Waitress union members held primarily part -time positions, whereas factory 
workers unions placed their members in full -time jobs.  
(D) Waitress unions em phasized the occupation of workers, whereas factory 
workers unions emphasized the worksite at which workers were employed.  
(E) Waitress unions defined the skills of their trade, whereas the skills of factory 
trades were determined by employers groups.  
19. According to the passage, which of the following was characteristic of the form 
of union that United States waitresses developed in the first half of the twentieth 
century?  
(A) The union represented a wide variety of restaurant and hotel service 
occup ations.  
(B) The union defined the skills required of waitresses and disciplined its 
members to meet certain standards.  
(C) The union billed employers for its members work and distributed the 
earnings among all members.  
(D) The union negotiated the enforce ment of occupational standards with each 
employer whose workforce joined the union.  
(E) The union ensured that a worker could not be laid off arbitrarily by an 
employer.  
20. The author of the passage mentions particular employers (line 8) primarily in  
order to  
(A) suggest that occupational unions found some employers difficult to satisfy  
(B) indicate that the occupational unions served some employers but not others  
(C) emphasize the unique focus of occupational unionism  
(D) accentuate the hostility of some employers toward occupational unionism  
(E) point out a weakness of worksite unionism  
In prehistoric times brachiopods  were one of the most abundant and diverse forms of life 
on Earth: more than 30,000 species of this clamlike creature have been cataloged from fossil 
records. Today brachiopods are not as numerous, and existi ng species are not well studied, 
partly because neither the animals fleshy inner tissue nor its shell has any commercial value. 
Moreover, in contrast to the greater diversity of the extinct species, the approximately 300 
known surviving species are relati vely uniform in appearance. Many zoologists have interpreted 
this as a sign that the animal has been unable to compete successfully with other marine 
organisms in the evolutionary struggle.  670 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 Several things, however, suggest that the conventional view needs revising. For example, 
the genus Lingula  has an unbroken fossil record extending over more than half a billion years to 
the present. Thus, if longevity is any measure, brachiopods are the most successful organisms 
extant. Further, recent studies suggest th at diversity among species is a less important measure 
of evolutionary success than is the ability to withstand environmental change, such as when a 
layer of clay replaces sand on the ocean bottom. The relatively greater uniformity among the 
existing brach iopod species may offer greater protection from environmental change and hence 
may reflect highly successful adaptive behavior.  
The adaptive advantages of uniformity for brachiopods can be seen by considering 
specialization, a process that occurs as a resu lt of prolonged colonization of a uniform substrate. 
Those that can survive on many surfaces are called generalists, while those that can survive on 
a limited range of substrates are called specialists. One specialist species, for example, has 
valves weigh ted at the base, a characteristic that assures that the organism is properly 
positioned for feeding in mud and similar substrates; other species secrete glue allowing them 
to survive on the face of underwater cliffs. The fossil record demonstrates that mos t brachiopod 
lineages have followed a trend toward increased specialization. However, during periods of 
environmental instability, when a particular substrate to which a specialist species has adapted 
is no longer available, the species quickly dies out. G eneralists, on the other hand, are not 
dependent on a particular substrate, and are thus less vulnerable to environmental change. 
One study of the fossil record revealed a mass extinction of brachiopods following a change in 
sedimentation from chalk to clay. Of the 35 brachiopod species found in the chalk, only 6 
survived in the clay, all of them generalists.  
As long as enough generalist species are maintained, and studie s of arctic and subarctic 
seas suggest that generalists are often dominant members of the marine communities there, it 
seems unlikely that the phylum is close to extinction.  
21. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) rejecting an earlie r explanation for the longevity of certain brachiopod 
species  
(B) reevaluating the implications of uniformity among existing brachiopod 
species  
(C) describing the varieties of environmental change to which brachiopods are 
vulnerable  
(D) reconciling opposin g explanations for brachiopods lack of evolutionary 
success  
(E) elaborating the mechanisms responsible for the tendency among brachiopod 
species toward specialization  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that many zoologists assume that a large 
diversity among species of a given class of organisms typically leads to which of 
the following?  
(A) Difficulty in classification  
(B) A discontinuous fossil record   GRE  671 
 (C) A greater chance of survival over time  
(D) Numerical abundance  
(E) A longer life span  
23. The second paragraph makes use of which of the following?  
(A) Specific examples  
(B) Analogy  
(C) Metaphor  
(D) Quotation  
(E) Exaggeration  
24. The author suggests that the scientists holding the conventional view mentioned 
in lines 15 -16 make which of the following errors?  
(A) They mistakenly emphasize survival ra ther than diversity.  
(B) They misunderstand the causes of specialization.  
(C) They misuse zoological terminology.  
(D) They catalog fossilized remains improperly.  
(E) They overlook an alternative criterion of evolutionary success.  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the decision to study an organism may 
sometimes be influenced by  
(A) its practical or commercial benefits to society  
(B) the nature and prevalence of its fossilized remains  
(C) the relative convenience of its geographical distribution  
(D) its similarity to one or more better -known species  
(E) the degree of its physiological complexity  
26. Which of the following, if true, would most strengthen the authors claim (lines 
56-57) that it seems unlikely that the phylum is close to extinction?  
(A) Generalist species now living in arctic wate r give few if any indications of a 
tendency towards significant future specialization.  
(B) Zoologists have recently discovered that a common marine organism is a 
natural predator of brachiopods.  
(C) It was recently discovered that certain brachiopod specie s are almost always 
concentrated near areas rich in offshore oil deposits.  
(D) The ratio of specialist to Generalist species is slowly but steadily increasing.  
(E) It is easier for a brachiopod to survive a change in sedimentation than a 
change in water temperature.  
27. Information in the passage supports which of the following statements about 
brachiopods?  
I. Few brachiopods living in prehistoric time s were specialists.  672 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 II. A tendency toward specialization, though typical, is not inevitable.  
III. Specialist species dominate in all but arctic and subarctic waters.  
(A) I only  
(B) II only  
(C) II and III only  
(D) I and III only  
(E) I, II and III  
1999 04    
SECTION A  
This passage is based on an article published in 1990.  
Eight times within the past million years, something in the Earths climatic equation has 
changed, allowing snow in the mountains and the northern latitudes to accumulate from one 
season t o the next instead of melting away. Each time, the enormous ice sheets resulting from 
this continual buildup lasted tens of thousands of years until the end of each particular glacial 
cycle brought a warmer climate. Scientists speculated that these glacial  cycles were ultimately 
driven by astronomical factors: slow, cyclic changes in the eccentricity  of the Earths orbit and in 
the tilt and orientation of its spin axis . But up until around 30 years ago, the lack of an 
independent r ecord of ice -age timing made the hypothesis untestable.  
Then in the early 1950s Emiliani produced the first complete record of the waxings and 
wanings of past glaciations. It came from a seemingly odd place, the seafloor. Single -cell 
marine organisms call ed foraminifera house themselves in shells made from calcium 
carbonate . When the foraminifera die, sink to the bottom, and become part of seafloor 
sediments, the carbonate of their shells preserves certain characteristics of the seawater they 
inhabited. In particular, the ratio of a heavy isotope of oxygen (oxygen -18) to ordinary oxygen 
(oxygen -16) in the carbonate preserves the ratio of the two oxygens in water molecules.  
It is now understood that the ratio of oxygen isotopes in seawater closely reflects the 
proportion of the worlds water locked up in glaciers an d ice sheets. A kind of meteorological 
distillation accounts for the link. Water molecules containing the heavier isotope tend to 
condense and fall as precipitation slightly sooner than molecules containing the lighter isotope. 
Hence, as water vapor evapor ated from warm oceans moves away from its source, its 
oxygen -18 returns more quickly to the oceans than does its oxygen -16. What falls as snow on 
distant ice sheets and mountain glaciers is relatively depleted of oxygen -18. As the 
oxygen -18-poor ice builds  up, the oceans become relatively enriched in the isotope. The larger 
the ice sheets grow, the higher the proportion of oxygen -18 becomes in seawater and hence 
in the sediments.  
Analyzing cores drilled from seafloor sediments, Emiliani found that the isoto pic ratio rose 
and fell in rough accord with the Earths astronomical cycles. Since that pioneering observation, 
oxygen -isotope measurements have been made on hundreds of cores. A chronology for the 
combined record enables scientists to show that the recor d contains the very same periodicities  GRE  673 
 as the orbital processes. Over the past 800,000 years, the global ice volume has peaked every 
100,000 years, matching the period of the orbital eccentricity variation. In addition, wrinkles 
superposed on each cycle small decreases or surges in ice volume have come at intervals of 
roughly 23,000 and 41,000 years, in keeping with  the precession and tilt frequencies of the 
Earths spin axis.  
17. Which of the following best expresses the mai n idea of the passage?  
(A) Marine sediments have allowed scientists to amass evidence tending to 
confirm that astronomical cycles drive the Earths glacial cycles.  
(B) The ratio between two different isotopes of oxygen in seawater correlates 
closely with t he size of the Earths ice sheets.  
(C) Surprisingly, single -cell marine organisms provide a record of the Earths ice 
ages.  
(D) The Earths astronomical cycles have recently been revealed to have an 
unexpectedly large impact on the Earths climate.  
(E) The earth has experienced eight periods of intense glaciation in the past 
million years, primarily as a result of substantial changes in its orbit.  
18. The passage asserts that one reason that oceans become enriched in oxygen -18 as 
ice sheets grow is because  
(A) water molecules containing oxygen -18 condense and fall as precipitation 
slightly sooner than those containing oxygen -16 
(B) the ratio of oxygen -18 to oxygen -16 in water vapor evaporated from oceans is 
different from that of these isotopes in  seawater  
(C) growing ice sheets tend to lose their oxygen -18 as the temperature of the 
oceans near them gradually decreases  
(D) less water vapor evaporates from oceans during glacial periods and therefore 
less oxygen -18 is removed from the seawater  
(E) the freezing point of seawater rich in oxygen -18 is slightly lower than that of 
seawater poor in oxygen -18 
19. According to the passage , the large ice sheets typical of glacial cycles are most 
directly caused by  
(A) changes in the average temperatu res in the tropics and over open oceans  
(B) prolonged increases in the rate at which water evaporates from the oceans  
(C) extreme seasonal variations in temperature in northern latitudes and in 
mountainous areas  
(D) steadily increasing precipitation rates in northern latitudes and in 
mountainous areas  
(E) the continual failure of snow to melt completely during the warmer seasons in 
northern latitudes and in mountainous areas  
20. It can be inferred from the passage that which of the following is true of the water 674 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 locked in glaciers and ice sheets tod ay? 
(A) It is richer in oxygen -18 than frozen water was during past glacial periods.  
(B) It is primarily located in the northern latitudes of the Earth.  
(C) Its ratio of oxygen isotopes is the same as that prevalent in seawater during 
the last ice age.  
(D) It is steadily decreasing in amount due to increased thawing during summer 
months.  
(E) In comparison with  seawater, it is relatively poor in oxygen -18. 
21. The discussion of the oxygen -isotope ratios in paragraph three of the passage 
suggests that which of the following must be assumed if the conclusi ons 
described in lines 49 -58 are to be validly drawn?  
(A) The Earths overall annual precipitation rates do not dramatically increase or 
decrease over time.  
(B) The various chemicals dissolved in seawater have had the same 
concentrations over the past mill ion years.  
(C) Natural processes unrelated to ice formation do not result in the formation of 
large quantities of oxygen -18. 
(D) Water molecules falling as precipitation usually fall on the open ocean rather 
than on continents or polar ice packs.  
(E) Increases in global temperature do not increase the amount of water that 
evaporates from the oceans.  
22. The passage suggests that the scientists who first constructed a coherent , 
continuous picture of past variations in marine -sediment isotope rat ios did which 
of the following?  
(A) Relied primarily on the data obtained from the analysis of Emilianis core 
samples.  
(B) Combined data derived from the analysis of many different core samples.  
(C) Matched the data obtained by geologists with that provid ed by astronomers.  
(D) Evaluated the isotope -ratio data obtained in several areas in order to eliminate 
all but the most reliable data.  
(E) Compared data obtained from core samples in many different marine 
environments with data samples derived from polar ice caps.  
23. The passage suggests that the scientists mentioned in line 8 considered their 
reconstruction of past astronomical cycl es to be  
(A) unreliable because astronomical observations have been made and recorded 
for only a few thousand years  
(B) adequate enough to allow that reconstructions use in explaining glacial 
cycles if a record of the latter could be found  
(C) in need of confirmation through comparison with an independent source of  GRE  675 
 information about astronomical phenomena  
(D) incomplete and therefore unusable for the purposes of explaining the causes 
of ice ages  
(E) adequate enough for scientists to support conclusively the idea that ice ages 
were caused by astronomical changes  
Although Victor Turners writings have proved fruitful for fields beyond anthropology, his 
definition of ritual is overly restrictive.  Ritual, he says, is prescribed formal behavior for 
occasions not given over  to technological routine, having reference to beliefs in mystical beings 
or powers. Technological routine refers to t he means by which a social group provides for its 
material needs. Turners differentiating  ritual from technology helps us recognize that festivals 
and celebrations may have little purpose other than play, but it obscures the practical aims, 
such as making  crops grow or healing patients, of other rituals. Further, Turners definition 
implies a necessary relationship between ritual and mystical beliefs. However, not all rituals are 
religious; some religions have no reference to mystical beings; and individua ls may be required 
only to participate in , not necessarily believe in , a ritual. Turners assumption that ritual 
behavior follows belief thus limits the usefulness of his definition in studying ritual across 
cultures.  
24. According to the passage, which of  the following does Turner exclude from his 
conception of ritual?  
(A) Behavior based on beliefs  
(B) Behavior based on formal rules  
(C) Celebrations whose purpose is play  
(D) Routines directed toward practical ends  
(E) Festivals honoring supernatural bei ngs 
25. The passage suggests that an assumption underlying Turners definition of ritual 
is that  
(A) anthropological concepts apply to other fields  
(B) festivals and ceremonies are related cultural phenomena  
(C) there is a relationship between play and pra ctical ends  
(D) rituals refer only to belief in mystical beings or powers  
(E) mystical beings and powers have certain common attributes across cultures  
26. It can be inferred that the author of the passage believes each of the following 
concerning rituals EXCEPT:  
(A) Some are unrelated to religious belief.  
(B) Some are inten ded to have practical consequences.  
(C) Some have no purpose other than play.  
(D) They sometimes involve reference to mystical beings.  
(E) They are predominantly focused on agricultural ends.  
27. Which of the following best describes the organization of  the passage?  676 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (A) Factual data are presented and a hypothesis is proposed.  
(B) A distinction is introduced then shown not to be a true distinction.  
(C) A statement is quoted, and two assumptions on which it is based are clarified.  
(D) A definition is chall enged, and two reasons for the challenge are given.  
(E) An opinion is offered and then placed within a historical framework.  
SECTION B 
Benjamin Franklin established that lightning is the transfer of positive or negative electrical 
charge between regions of a cloud or from cloud to earth. Such transfers require that 
electrically neutral clouds, with uniform charge distributions, become electrified by separation 
of charges into distinct regions. The greater this separation is, the greater the voltage, or 
electrical potential of the cloud.  Scientists still do not now the precise distribution of charges in 
thunderclouds nor how separation adequate to support the huge voltages typical of lightning 
bolts arises. According to one theory, the precipitation hypothesis, charge separation occurs as 
a result of preci pitation. Larger droplets in a thundercloud  precipitate downward past smaller 
suspended droplets. Collisions among droplets transfer negative charge to precipitating 
droplets, leaving the suspended droplets with a positive charge, thus producing a positive 
dipole  in which the lower region of the thundercloud is filled with negatively charged raindrops 
and the upper with positively charged suspended droplets.  
17. The passage is primarily concerned with discussi ng which of the following?  
(A) A central issue in the explanation of how lightning occurs  
(B) Benjamin Franklins activities as a scientist  
(C) Research into the strength and distribution of thunderstorms  
(D) The direction of movement of electrical charges  in thunderclouds  
(E) The relation between a clouds charge distribution and its voltage  
18. The passage suggests that lightning bolts typically  
(A) produce a distribution of charges called a positive dipole in the clouds where 
they originate  
(B) result in the movement of negative charges to the centers of the clouds where 
they originate  
(C) result in the suspension of large, positively charged raindrops at the tops of 
the clouds where they originate  
(D) originate in clouds that have large numbers of negatively charged d roplets in 
their upper regions  
(E) originate in clouds in which the positive and negative charges are not 
uniformly distributed  
19. According to the passage, Benjamin Franklin contributed to the scientific study of 
lightning by  
(A) testing a theory proposed earlier, showing it to be  false, and developing an  GRE  677 
 alternative, far more successful theory of his own  
(B) making an important discovery that is still important for scientific 
investigations of lightning  
(C) introducing a hypothesis that, though recently shown to be false, proved t o be 
a useful source of insights for scientists studying lightning  
(D) developing a technique that has enabled scientists to measure more precisely 
the phenomena that affect the strength and location of lightning bolts  
(E) predicting correctly that two factors previously thought unrelated to lightning 
would eventually be shown to contribute jointly to the strength and location 
of lightning bolts  
20. Which of the following, if true, would most seriously undermine the precipitation 
hypothesis, as it is set forth in the passage?  
(A) Larger clouds are more likely than smaller clouds to be characterized by 
complete separation of positive and negative charges.  
(B) In smaller clouds lightning more often occurs within the clo ud than between 
the cloud and the earth.  
(C) Large raindrops move more rapidly in small clouds than they do in large 
clouds.  
(D) Clouds that are smaller than average in size rarely, if ever, produce lightning 
bolts.  
(E) In clouds of all sizes negative charges concentrate in the center of the clouds 
when the clouds become electrically charged . 
Before Laura Gilpin (1891 -1979), few women in the history of photography had so devoted 
themselves to chronicling the lands cape. Other women had photographed the land, but none 
can be regarded as a landscape photographer with a sustained body of work documenting the 
physical terrain. Anne Brigman often photographed woodlands and coastal areas, but they 
were generally settings for her artfully placed subjects. Dorothea Langes landscapes were 
always conceived of as counterparts to her portraits of rural women.  
At the same time that  Gilpins interest in landscape work distinguished her from most other 
women photographers, her app roach  to landscape photography set her apart from men 
photographers who, like Gilpin, documented the western United States. Western American 
landscape photography grew out of a male tradition, pioneered by photographers attache d to 
government and commercial survey teams that went west in the 1860s and 1870s. These 
explorer -photographers documented the West that their employers wanted to see: an exotic 
and majestic land shaped by awesome natural forces, unpopulated and ready fo r American 
settlement. The next generation of male photographers, represented by Ansel Adams and Eliot 
Porter, often worked with conservationist groups rather than government agencies or 
commercial companies, but they nonetheless preserved the heroic sty le and maintained the 
role of respectful outsider peering in  with reverence at a fragile natural world.  
For Gilpin, by contrast, the landscape was neither an empty vista awaiting human 
settlement nor a jewel -like scene resisting human intrusion, but a peop led landscape with a rich 678 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 history and tradition of its own, an environment that shaped and molded the lives of its 
inhabitants. Her photographs of the Rio Grande, for example, consistently depict the river in 
terms of its significance to human culture: as a source of irrigation water, a source of food for 
livestock, and a provider of town sites. Also instructive is Gilpins general avoidance of extreme 
close-ups of her natural subjects: for her, emblematic d etails could never suggest the intricacies 
of the interrelationship between people and nature that made the landscape a compelling 
subject. While it is dangerous to draw conclusions about a feminine way of seeing from the 
work of one woman, it can noneth eless be argued that Gilpins unique approach to landscape 
photography was analogous to the work of many women writers who, far more than their male 
counterparts, described the landscape in terms of its potential to sustain human life.  
Gilpin never spoke o f herself as a photographer with a feminine perspective: she eschewed 
any discussion of gender as it related to her work and maintained little interest in 
interpretations that relied on the concept of a womans eye. Thus it is ironic that her 
photographi c evocation of a historical landscape should so clearly present a distinctively 
feminine approach to landscape photography.  
21. Which of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Gilpins landscape photographs more accurately documente d the Southwest 
than did the photographs of explorers and conservationists.  
(B) Gilpins style of landscape photography substantially influenced the heroic 
style practiced by her male counterparts.  
(C) The labeling of Gilpins style of landscape photograph y as feminine ignores 
important ties between it and the heroic style.  
(D) Gilpins work exemplifies an arguably feminine style of landscape 
photography that contrasts with the style used by her male predecessors.  
(E) Gilpins style was strongly influenc ed by the work of women writers who 
described the landscape in terms of its relationship to people.  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that the teams mentioned in line 19 were most 
interested in which of the following aspects of the land in the wester n United 
States?  
(A) Its fragility in the face of increased human intrusion  
(B) Its role in shaping the lives of indigenous peoples  
(C) Its potential for sustaining future settlements  
(D) Its importance as an environment for rare plants and animals  
(E) Its unusual vulnerability to extreme natural forces  
23. The author of the passage claims that which of the following is the primary 
reason why Gilpin generally avoided extreme close -ups of natural subjects?  
(A) Gilpin believed that pictures of natu ral details could not depict the 
interrelationship between the land and humans.  
(B) Gilpin considered close -up photography to be too closely associated with her 
predecessors.   GRE  679 
 (C) Gilpin believed that all of her photographs should include people in them.  
(D) Gilpin associated close -up techniques with photography used for commercial 
purposes.  
(E) Gilpin feared that pictures of small details would suggest an indifference to 
the fragility of the land as a whole.  
24. The passage suggests that a photographer who practiced the heroic style would be 
most likely to emphasize which of the following  in a photographic series focusing 
on the Rio Grande?  
(A) Indigenous people and their ancient customs relating to the river  
(B) The exploits of navigators and explorers  
(C) Unpopulated, pristine parts of the river and its surroundings  
(D) Existing commerci al ventures that relied heavily on the river  
(E) The dams and other monumental engineering structures built on the river  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the first two generations of landscape 
photographers in the western United States had which of the following in 
common?  
(A) They ph otographed the land as an entity that had little interaction with human 
culture.  
(B) They advanced the philosophy that photographers should resist alliances with 
political or commercial groups.  
(C) They were convinced that the pristine condition of the lan d needed to be 
preserved by government action.  
(D) They photographed the land as a place ready for increased settlement.  
(E) They photographed only those locations where humans had settled.  
26. Based on the description of her works in the passage, which of the following  
would most likely be a subject for a photograph taken by Gilpin?  
(A) A vista of a canyon still untouch ed by human culture  
(B) A portrait of a visitor to the West against a desert backdrop  
(C) A view of historic Native American dwellings carved into the side of a natural 
cliff 
(D) A picture of artifacts from the West being transported to the eastern United 
States for retail sale  
(E) An abstract pattern created by the shadows of clouds on the desert  
27. The author of the passage mentions women writers in line 50 most likely in order 
to 
(A) counter a widely held criticism of her argument  
(B) bolster her argument that Gilpins st yle can be characterized as a feminine 
style  680 GMAT, GRE, LSAT    
 (C) suggest that Gilpin took some of her ideas for photographs from landscape 
descriptions by women writers  
(D) clarify the interrelationship between human culture and the land that Gilpin 
was attempting to capt ure 
(E) offer an analogy between photographic close -ups and literary descriptions of 
small details   LSAT  681 
 LSAT   01    SECTION III  
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the bas is of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the  question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
Immigrants  adoption of English as their primary language is one measure of assimilation 
into the larger United States society. Generally languages define social groups and provide 
justification for social structures. Hence, a distinctive  language sets a cultural group off from 
the dominant language group. Throughout United States history this pattern has resulted in 
one consistent, unhappy consequen ce, discrimination against members of the cultural minority. 
Language differences provide both a way to rationalize subordination and a ready means for 
achieving it.  
Traditionally, English has replaced the native language of immigrant groups by the second 
or third generation. Some characteristics of today s Spanish -speaking population, however, 
suggest the possibility of a departure from this historical pattern. Many families retain ties in 
Latin America and move back and forth between their present and for mer communities. This 
revolving door  phenomenon, along with the high probability of additional immigrants from the 
south, means that large Spanish -speaking communities are likely to exist in the United States 
for the indefinite future.  
This expectation underlies the call for national  support for bilingual education in 
Spanish -speaking communities  public schools. Bilingual education can serve different purposes, 
however. In the 1960s, such programs were established to facilitate the learning of English so 
as to avoid disadvantaging ch ildren in their other subjects because of their limited English. More 
recently, many advocates have viewed bilingual education as a means to maintain children s 
native languages and cultures. The issue is important for people with different political agend as, 
from absorption at one pole to separatism at the other.  
To date, the evaluations of bilingual education s impact on learning have been inconclusive . 
The issue of bilingual education has, nevertheless, served to unite the leadership of the nation s 
Hispanic communities. Grounded in concerns about status that are directly traceable to the 
United States history of discrimination against Hisp anics, the demand for maintenance of the 
Spanish language in the schools is an assertion  of the worth of a people and their culture. If the 
United States is truly a multicultural nation that is, if it is one culture reflecting the 
contributions of many this demand should be seen as a demand not for separation but for 
inclusion.  
More direct efforts to force inclusion can be misguided. For example, movements to 
declare English the official language do not  truly advance the cohesion of a multicultural nation. 
They alienate the twenty million people who do not speak English as their mother tongue . They 
are unnecessary since the public s business is already conducted largely in English. Further, 
given the pre sent state of understanding about the effects of bilingual education on learning, it 
would be unwise to require the universal use of English. Finally, it is for parents and local 682 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 communities to choose the path they will follow, including how much of their culture they want 
to maintain for their children.  
1. It can be inferred from the passage that one of the characteristics of immigrant 
groups to the United States has traditionally been that, after immigration, 
relatively few members of the group  
(A) became  politically active in their new communities  
(B) moved back and forth repeatedly between the United States and their former 
communities  
(C) used their native languages in their new communities  
(D) suffered discrimination in their new communities at the han ds of the cultural 
majority  
(E) sought assimilation into the dominant culture of the new communities they 
were entering  
2. The passage suggests that one of the effects of the debate over bilingual education 
is that it has  
(A) given the Hispanic communit y a new -found pride in its culture  
(B) hampered the education of Spanish -speaking students  
(C) demonstrated the negative impact on imposing English as the official United 
States language  
(D) provided a common banner under which the Spanish -speaking communi ties 
could rally  
(E) polarized the opinions of local Spanish -speaking community leaders  
3. In lines 38 -39, the phrase different political agendas  refers specifically to 
conflicting opinions regarding the  
(A) means of legislating the assimilation of minorities into Un ited States society  
(B) methods of inducing Hispanics to adopt English as their primary language  
(C) means of achieving nondiscriminatory education for Hispanics  
(D) official given responsibility for decisions regarding bilingual education  
(E) extent to  which Hispanics should blend into the larger United States society  
4. In lines 64 -65 the author says that It would be unwise to require the universal 
use of English.  One reason for this, according to the author, is that  
(A) it is not clear yet whether r equiring the universal use of English would 
promote or hinder the education of children whose English is limited  
(B) the nation s Hispanic leaders have shown that bilingual education is most 
effective when it includes the maintenance of the Spanish languag e in the 
schools  
(C) requiring the universal use of English would reduce the cohesion of the 
nation s Hispanic communities and leadership  
(D) the question of language in the schools should be answered by those who  LSAT  683 
 evaluate bilingual education, not by peopl e with specific political agendas  
(E) it has been shown that bilingual education is necessary to avoid 
disadvantaging in their general learning children whose English is limited  
5. In the last paragraph, the author of the passage is primarily concerned with 
discussing  
(A) reasons again st enacting a measure that would mandate the forced inclusion 
of immigrant groups within the dominant United culture  
(B) the virtues and limitations of declaring English the official language of the 
United States  
(C) the history of attitudes within the His panic community toward bilingual 
education in the United States  
(D) the importance for immigrant groups of maintaining large segments of their 
culture to pass on to their children  
(E) the difference in cultures between Hispanics and other immigrant groups in 
the United States  
The refusal of some countries to extradite persons accused or convicted of terrorist act has 
focused attention on the problems caused by the political offe nse exception to extradition. 
Extradition is the process by which one country returns an accused or convicted person found 
within its borders to another country for trial or punishment. Under the political offense 
exception, the requested state may, if it considers the crime to be a political offense,  deny 
extradition to the requesting state.  
Protection of political offenses is a recent addition to the ancient practice of extradition. It 
is the result of two fundamental changes that occurred as European m onarchies were replaced 
by representative governments. First, these governments began to reject what had been a 
primary intent of extradition, to expedite the return of political offenders, and instead sought to 
protect dissidents fleeing despotic regimes.  Second , countries began to contend that they had 
no legal or moral duty to extradite offenders without specific agreements creating such 
obligations. As extradition laws subsequently developed through international treaties, the 
political offense exceptio n gradually became an accepted principle among Western nations.  
There is no international consensus, however, as to what constitutes a political offense. For 
analytical purposes illegal political conduct has traditionally been divided into two categories. 
Pure political offenses are acts perpetrated directly against the government, such as treason 
and espionage. These crimes are generally recognized as nonextraditable, even if not expressly  
excluded from extradition by the applicable treaty. In contrast, common crimes, such as murder, 
assault, and robbery, are generally extraditable. However, there are some common crimes that 
are so inseparable from a political act that the entire offense is regarded as political. These 
crimes, which are called relative  political offenses, are generally nonextraditable. Despite the 
widespread acceptance of these analytic constructs, the distinctions are more academic than 
meaningful. When it comes to real cases, there is no agreement about what transforms a 
common crime i nto a political offense and about whether terrorist acts fall within the protection 
of the exception. Most terrorists claim that their acts do fall under  this protection.  
Nations of the world must now balance the competing need s of political freedom and 684 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 international public order. It is time to reexamine the political offense exception, as 
international terrorism eradicates the critical distinctions  between  political offenses and 
nonpolitical crimes. The only rational and attain able objective of the exception is to protect the 
requested person against unfair treatment by the requesting country. The international 
community needs to find an alternative to the political offense exception that would protect the 
rights of requested pe rsons and yet not offer terrorists immunity from criminal liability.  
6. In the passage, the author primarily seeks to  
(A) define a set of terms  
(B) outline a new approach  
(C) describe a current problem  
(D) expose an illegal practice  
(E) present historic al information  
7. According to the passage, when did countries begin to except political offenders 
from extradition?  
(A) when the principle of extraditing accused or convicted persons originated  
(B) when some nations began refusing to extradite persons acc used or convicted 
of terrorist acts  
(C) when representative governments began to replace European monarchies  
(D) when countries began to refuse to extradite persons accused or convicted of 
common crimes  
(E) when governments began to use extradition to expedite the return of political 
offenders  
8. Given the discussion in the passage, which one of the following distinctions does 
the author consider particularly problematic?  
(A) between common crimes and  relative  political offense  
(B) between pure political offenses and common crimes  
(C) between pure political offenses and relative  political offenses  
(D) between terrorist acts and acts of espionage  
(E) between the political offense exception an d other exceptions to extradition  
9. According to the author, the primary purpose of the political offense exception 
should be to  
(A) ensure that terrorists are tried for their acts  
(B) ensure that individuals accused of political crimes are not treated un fairly  
(C) distinguish between political and nonpolitical offenses  
(D) limit extradition to those accused of pure political offenses  
(E) limit extradition to those accused of relative  political offenses  
10. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would agree with which one of 
the following statements about the political offense exception?   LSAT  685 
 (A) The exception is very unpo pular.  
(B) The exception is probably illegal.  
(C) The exception is used too little.  
(D) The exception needs rethinking.  
(E) The exception is too limited.  
11. When referring to a balance between the competing needs of political freedom 
and international  public order  (lines 54 -55) the author means that nations must 
strike a balance between  
(A) allowing persons to protest political injustice and preventing them from 
committing political offenses  
(B) protecting the rights of persons requested for extraditi on and holding 
terrorists criminally liable  
(C) maintaining the political offense exception to extradition and clearing up the 
confusion over what is a political offense  
(D) allowing nations to establish their own extradition policies and establishing 
an agreed -upon international approach to extradition  
(E) protecting from extradition persons accused of pure political offenses and 
ensuring the trial of persons accused of relative  political offenses  
12. The author would most likely agree that the poli tical offense exception  
(A) has, in some cases, been stretched beyond intended use  
(B) has been used too infrequently to be evaluated  
(C) has been a modestly useful weapon again terrorism  
(D) has never met the objective for which it was originally establis hed 
(E) has been of more academic than practical value to political dissidents  
13. Which one of the following, if true, would give the author most cause to 
reconsider her recommendation regarding the political offence exception (lines 
62-66)? 
(A) More nati ons started refusing to extradite persons accused or convicted of 
terrorist acts.  
(B) More nations started extraditing persons accused or convicted of treason, 
espionage, and other similar crimes.  
(C) The nations of the world sharply decreased their use of  the political offense 
exception protect persons accused of each of the various types of pure 
political offenses.  
(D) The nations of the world sharply decreased their use of the political offense 
exception to protect persons accused of each of the variou s types of 
relative  political offenses.  
(E) The nations of the world started to disagree over the analytical distinction 
between pure political offenses and relative  political offenses.  686 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 As is well known and has often been described, the machine in dustry of recent times took 
its rise  by a gradual emergence out of handicraft in England in the eighteenth century. Since 
then the mechanical industry has progressively been getting the upper hand  in all the civilized 
nations, in muc h the same degree in which these nations have come to be counted as civilized. 
This mechanical industry now stands dominant at the apex of the industrial system.  
The state of the industrial arts , as it runs on the lines of the mechanical industry, is a 
technology of physics and chemistry. That is to say, it is governed by the same logic as the 
scientific laboratories. The procedure , the principles, habits of thought, preconceptions, units of 
measurement and of valuation, are the same in both cases.  
The tech nology of physics and chemistry is not derived from established law and custom, 
and it goes on its way with as nearly complete a disregard of the spiritual truths of law and 
custom as the circumstances will permit. The realities with which this technology is occupied 
are of another order of actuality, lying altogether within the three dimensions that contain the 
material universe, and running altogether on the logic of material fact. In effect it is the logic of 
inanimate facts.  
The mechanical industry make s use of the same range of facts handled in the same 
impersonal way and directed to the same manner of objective results. In both cases alike it is of 
the first importance to eliminate the personal equation , to let the work go forward and let the 
forces at work take effect  quite objectively, without hindrance or deflection for any personal end, 
interest, or gain. It is the technician s place in industry, as it is the scientist s place in t he 
laboratory, to serve as an intellectual embodiment of the forces at work, isolate the forces 
engaged from all extraneous disturbances, and let them take full effect along the lines of 
designed work. The technician is an active or creative factor in the case only in the sense that 
he is the keeper of the logic which governs the forces at work.  
These forces that so are brought to bear in mechanical industry are of an objective, 
impersonal, unconventional nature, of course. They are of the nature of opaque fact . Pecuniary 
gain is not one of these impersonal facts. Any consideration of pecuniary gain that may be 
injected into the technician s working plans will come into the case as an intrusive and alien 
factor, whose sole effec t is to deflect, retard, derange and curtail the work in hand. At the same 
time considerations of pecuniary gain are the only agency  brought into the case by the 
businessmen, and the only ground on which they exercise a control of production.  
14. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with discussing  
(A) industrial organization in the eighteenth century  
(B) th e motives for pecuniary gain  
(C) the technician s place in mechanical industry  
(D) the impersonal organization of industry  
(E) the material contribution of physics in industrial society  
15. The author of the passage suggests that businessmen in the mechanical industry 
are responsible mainly for  
(A) keeping the logic governing the forces at work  
(B) managing the profits   LSAT  687 
 (C) directing the activities of the technicians  
(D) employing the technological procedures of physics and chemistry  
(E) treating material gain as a spiritual truth  
16. Which one of the following, if true, would contradict the author s belief that the 
role of technician is to be the keeper of the logic  (lines 45 -46)? 
(A) All technicians are human beings with feelings and emotions.  
(B) An interest in pecuniary gain is the technician s sole motive for participation 
in industry.  
(C) The technician s working p lans do not coincide with the technician s 
pecuniary interests.  
(D) Technicians are employed by businessmen to oversee the forces at work.  
(E) Technicians refuse to carry out the instructions of the businessmen.  
17. The author would probably most strongly agree with which one of the following 
statements about the evolution of the industrial system?  
(A) The handicraft system of industry em erged in eighteenth -century England and 
was subsequently replaced by the machine industry.  
(B) The handicraft system of industrial production has gradually given rise to a 
mechanistic technology that dominates contemporary industry.  
(C) The handicraft syst em emerged as the dominant factor of production in 
eighteenth -century England but was soon replaced by mechanical techniques 
of production.  
(D) The mechanical system of production that preceded the handicraft system 
was the precursor of contemporary means of production.  
(E) The industrial arts developed as a result of the growth of the mechanical 
industry that followed the decline of the handicraft system of production.  
18. Which one of the following best describes the author s attitude toward scientific  
techniques?  
(A) critical  
(B) hostile  
(C) idealistic  
(D) ironic  
(E) neutral  
(This passage was originally published in 1905)  
The word democracy may stand for a natural social equality in the body politic  or for a 
constitutional form of government in which power lies more or less directly in the people s hand. 
The former may be called social democracy  and the later democratic government. T he two 
differ widely, both in origin and in moral principle. Gene tically considered, social democracy is 
something primitive, unintended, proper to communities where there is general competence 
and no marked personal eminence. There be no will aristocracy,  no prestige, but instead an 688 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 intelligent readiness to lend a hand  and to do in unison  whatever is done. In other words , there 
will be that most democratic of governments no government at all. But when pressure of 
circumstance s, danger, or inward strife makes recogni zed and prolonged guidance necessary to 
a social democracy, the form its government takes is that of a rudimentary monarchy 
established by election or general consent. A natural leader emerges and is instinctively obeyed. 
That leader may indeed be freely c riticized and will not be screened by any pomp or traditional 
mystery; he or she will be easy to replace and every citizen will feel essentially h is or her equal. 
Yet such a state is at the beginnings of monarchy and aristocracy.  
Political democracy, on th e other hand, is a late and artificial product. It arises by a gradual 
extension of aristocratic privileges, through rebellion against abuses, and in answer to 
restlessness on the people s part . Its principle is not the absence of eminence, but the discove ry 
that existing eminence is no longer genuine and representative. It may retain many vestiges of 
older and less democratic institutions. For under democratic governments the people have not 
created the state ; they merely control it. Their suspicions and j ealousies are quieted by 
assigning to them a voice, perhaps only a veto, in the administration. The people s liberty 
consists not in  their original responsibility for what exists, but merely in the faculty they have 
acquired of abolishing  any detail that may distress or wound them, and of imposing any new 
measure, which, seen against the background of existing laws, may commend itself from time 
to time to their instinct and mind.  
If we turn from origins to ideals, the con trast between social and political democracy is no 
less marked. Social democracy is a general ethical ideal, looking to  human equality and 
brotherhood, and inconsistent , in its radical form, with such institutions as the family and 
hereditary property . Democratic government, on the contrary, is merely a means to an end, an 
expedient  for the better and smoother government of certain states at certain junctures. It 
involves  no special ideals of life; it is a question of policy, namely, whether the general interest 
will be better served by granting all people an equal voice in elections. For  political democracy 
must necessarily be a government by deputy, and the questions actually submitted to the 
people can be only very large rough matters of general policy or of confidence in party leaders.  
19. The author suggests that the lack of marked p ersonal eminence  (line 11) is an 
important feature of a social democracy because  
(A) such a society is also likely to contain the seeds of monarchy and aristocracy  
(B) the absence of visible social leaders in such a society will probably impede 
the develo pment of a political democracy  
(C) social democracy represents a more sophisticated form of government than 
political democracy  
(D) a society that lacks recognized leadership will be unable to accomplish its 
cultural objectives  
(E) the absence of visible social leaders in such a community is likely to be 
accompanied by a spirit of cooperation  
20. Which one of the following forms of government does the author say is most 
likely to evolve from a social democracy?  
(A) monarchy   LSAT  689 
 (B) government by deputy  
(C) political democracy  
(D) representative democracy  
(E) constitutional democracy  
21. The author of the passage suggests that a political democracy is likely to have 
been immediately preceded by which one of the following forms o f social 
organization?  
(A) a social democracy in which the spirit of participation has been diminished by 
the need to maintain internal security  
(B) an aristocratic society in which government leaders have grown insensitive to 
people s interests  
(C) a prim itive society that stresses the radical equality of all its members  
(D) a state of utopian brotherhood in which no government exists  
(E) a government based on general ethical ideals  
22. According to the passage, the people s liberty  (line 42) in a political democracy 
is best defined as  
(A) a willingness to accept responsibility for existing governmental forms  
(B) a myth perpetrate d by aristocratic leaders who refuse to grant political power 
to their subjects  
(C) the ability to impose radically new measures when existing governmental 
forms are found to be inadequate  
(D) the ability to secure concessions from a government that may re tain many 
aristocratic characteristics  
(E) the ability to elect leaders whom the people consider socially equal to 
themselves  
23. According to the author of this passage, a social democracy would most likely 
adopt a formal system of government when  
(A) recognized leadership becomes necessar y to deal with social problems  
(B) people lose the instinctive ability to cooperate in solving social problems  
(C) a ruling monarch decides that it is necessary to grant political concessions to 
the people  
(D) citizens no longer consider their social leade rs essentially equal to themselves  
(E) the human instinct to obey social leaders has been weakened by suspicion and 
jealousy  
24. According to the passage, which one of the following is likely to occur as a result 
of the discovery that existing eminence is no longer genuine and represen tative  
(lines 35 -36)? 
(A) Aristocratic privileges will be strengthened, which will result in a further loss 
of the people s liberty.  690 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (B) The government will be forced to admit its responsibility for the inadequacy 
of existing political institutions.  
(C) T he remaining vestiges of less democratic institutions will be banished from 
government.  
(D) People will gain political concessions from the government and a voice in the 
affairs of state.  
(E) People will demand that political democracy conform to the ethical ideals of 
social democracy.  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the practice of government by deputy  
(line 64) in a political democracy probably has its origins in  
(A) ar istocratic ideals  
(B) human instincts  
(C) a commitment to human equality  
(D) a general ethical ideal  
(E) a policy decision  
26. Which one of the following statements, if true, would contradict the author s 
notion of the characteristics of social democrac y? 
(A) Organized governmental systems tend to arise spontaneously, rather than in 
response to specific problem situations.  
(B) The presence of an organized system of government stifles the expression of 
human equality and brotherhood.  
(C) Social democracy represents a more primitive form of communal 
organization than political democracy.  
(D) Prolonged and formal leadership may become necessary in a social 
democracy when problems arise that cannot be resolved by recourse to the 
general competence of the peop le. 
(E) Although political democracy and social democracy are radically different 
forms of communal organization, it is possible for both to contain elements 
of monarchy.  
LSAT   02    SECTION I  
Time  35 minutes  28 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in th is section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answe r, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
There is substantial evidence that by 1926, with the publication of The Weary Blues , 
Langston Hughes had broken wit h two well -established traditions in African American literature. 
In The Weary Blues , Hughes chose to modify the traditions that decreed that African American  LSAT  691 
 literature must promote racial acceptance and integration, and that, in ord er to do so, it must 
reflect an understanding and mastery of Western European literary techniques and styles. 
Necessarily excluded by this decree, linguistically and thematically, was the vast amount of 
secular folk material in the oral tradition that had been created by Black people  in the years of 
slavery and after . It might be pointed out that even the spirituals or sorrow songs  of the 
slaves as distinct from their secular songs and stories had been Europeanized to make them 
acceptable within these Afr ican American traditions after the Civil War. In 1862 northern White 
writers had commented favorably on the unique and provocative melodies of these sorrow 
songs  when they first heard them sung by slaves in the Carolina sea islands. But by 1916, ten 
years before the publication of The Weary Blues , Hurry T. Burleigh, the Black baritone soloist at 
New York s ultrafashionable  Saint George s Episcopal Church, had published Jubilee  Songs of 
the United States , with every spiritual arranged so that a concert singer could sing it in the 
manner of an art song.  Clearly, the artistic work of B lack people could be used to promote 
racial acceptance and integration only on the condition that it became Europeanized.  
Even more than his rebellion against  this restrictive tradition in African American art, 
Hughes s expression of the vibrant folk cultu re of Black people established his writing as a 
landmark in the history of African American literature. Most of his folk poems have the 
distinctive marks of this folk culture s oral tradition: they contain many instances of naming and 
enumeration, consider able hyperbole and understatement , and a strong infusion of street -talk 
rhyming. There is a deceptive veil of artlessness in these poems. Hughes prided himself on 
being  an impromptu and impressioni stic writer of poetry. His, he insisted, was not an artfully 
constructed poetry. Yet an analysis of his dramatic monologues and other poems reveals that 
his poetry was carefully and artfully crafted. In his folk poetry we find features common to all 
folk literature, such as dramatic ellipsis, narrative compression, rhythmic repetition, and 
monosyllabic emphasis. The peculiar mixture of irony and humor we find in his writing is a 
distinguishing feature of his folk poetry. Together, these aspects of Hughes s writing helped to 
modify the previous restrictions on the techniques and subject matter of Black writers and 
consequently to broaden the linguistic and thematic range of African American literature.  
1. The author mentions which one of the following as an e xample of the influence 
of Black folk culture on Hughes s poetry?  
(A) his exploitation of ambiguous and deceptive meanings  
(B) his care and craft in composing poems  
(C) his use of naming and enumeration  
(D) his use of first -person narrative  
(E) his stro ng religious beliefs  
2. The author suggests that the deceptive veil  (line 42) in Hughes s poetry 
obscures  
(A) evidence of his use of oral techniques in his poetry  
(B) evidence of his thoughtful deliberation in composing his poems  
(C) his scrupulous conce rn for representative details in his poetry  
(D) his incorporation of Western European literary techniques in his poetry  692 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (E) his engagement with social and political issues rather than aesthetic ones  
3. With which one of the following statements regarding Jubilee Songs of the United 
States  would the author be most likely to agree?  
(A) Its publication marked an advance in  the intrinsic quality of African American 
art. 
(B) It paved the way for publication of Hughes s The Weary Blues by making 
African American art fashionable.  
(C) It was an authentic replication of African American spirituals and sorrow 
songs . 
(D) It demon strated the extent to which spirituals were adapted in order to make 
them more broadly accepted.  
(E) It was to the spiritual what Hughes s The Weary Blues was to secular songs 
and stories.  
4. The author most probably mentions the reactions of northern White writers to 
non-Europeanized sorrow songs  in order to  
(A) indicate that modes of expressio n acceptable in the context of slavery in the 
South were acceptable only to a small number of White writers in the North 
after the Civil War  
(B) contrast White writers earlier appreciation of these songs with the growing 
tendency after the Civil War to reg ard Europeanized versions of the songs as 
more acceptable  
(C) show that the requirement that such songs be Europeanized was internal to 
the African American tradition and was unrelated to the literary standards or 
attitudes of White writers  
(D) demonstrate  that such songs in their non -Europeanized form were more 
imaginative  
(E) suggest that White writers benefited more from exposure to African American 
art forms than Black writers did from exposure to European art forms  
5. The passage suggests that the a uthor would be most likely to agree with which 
one of the following statements about the requirement that Black writers employ 
Western European literary techniques?  
(A) The requirement was imposed more for social than for aesthetic reasons.  
(B) The require ment was a relatively unimportant aspect of the African American 
tradition.  
(C) The requirement was the chief reason for Hughes s success as a writer.  
(D) The requirement was appropriate for some forms of expression but not for 
others.  
(E) The requirement was never as strong as it may have appeared to be.  
6. Which one of the following aspects of Hughes s poetry does the author appear to  LSAT  693 
 value most highly?  
(A) its novelty compared to other works of African American literature  
(B) its subtle understatement compared to that of other kinds of folk literature  
(C) its virtuosity in adapting musical forms to language  
(D) its expression of the folk culture of Black people  
(E) its universality of appeal achieved through the adoption of coll oquial 
expressions  
Historians generally agree that, of the great modern innovations, the railroad had the most 
far-reaching impact on major events in the United States in the nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries, particularly on the Industrial Revoluti on. There is, however, considerable 
disagreement among cultural historians regarding public attitudes toward the railroad, both at 
its inception in the 1830s and during the half century  between 1880 and 1930, when the 
national  rail system was completed and  reached the zenith of its popularity in the United States. 
In a recent book, John Stilgoe has addressed this issue by arguing that the romantic -era 
distrust  of the railroad that he claims was present during the 1830s vanished in the decades 
after 1880. But the argument he provides in support of this position is unconvincing.  
What Stilgoe calls romantic -era distrust  was in fact the reaction of a minority of writers, 
artistes, and intellectuals who distrusted the railroad not so much for what it was as for what it 
signified . Thoreau and Hawthorne appreciated, even admired, an improved means of moving 
things and people from one place to another. What these writers and others were concerned 
about was not the new machinery as such , but the new kind of economy, social order, and 
culture that it prefigured. In addition, Stilgoe is wrong to imply that the critical attitude of these 
writers was typical of the period: their distrust  was largely a reaction against the prevailing 
attitude in the 1830s that the railroad was an unqualified improvement.  
Stilgoe s assertion that the ambivalence toward the railroad exhibited by writers like 
Hawthorne and Thoreau disappeared after the 1880s is also misleading. In support  of this 
thesis, Stilgoe has unearthed an impressive volume of material, the work of hitherto unknown 
illustrators, journalists , and novelists, all devotees  of the railroad; but it is not clear what this 
new material proves except perhaps that the works of popular culture greatly expanded at the 
time. The volume of the material proves nothing if Stilgoe s point is that  the earlier distrust of a 
minority of intellectuals did not endure beyond the 1880s, and, oddly, much of Stilgoe s other 
evidence indicates that it did. When he glances at the treatment of railroads by writers like 
Henry James, Sinclair Lewis, or F. Scott F itzgerald, what comes through  in spite of Stilgoe s 
analysis is remarkably like Thoreau s feeling of contrariety and ambivalence. (Had he looked at 
the work of Frank Norris, Eugene O Neill, or Henry Adams, Stilgoe s case would have  been much 
stronger.) The point is that the sharp contrast between the enthusiastic supporters of the 
railroad in the 1830s and the minority of intellectual dissenters during that period extended into 
the 1880s and beyond . 
7. The passage provides informati on to answer all of the following questions 
EXCEPT:  
(A) During what period did the railroad reach the zenith of its popularity in the 
United States?  694 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (B) How extensive was the impact of the railroad on the Industrial Revolution in 
the United States, relativ e to that of other modern innovations?  
(C) Who are some of the writers of the 1830s who expressed ambivalence toward 
the railroad?  
(D) In what way could Stilgoe have strengthened his argument regarding 
intellectuals  attitudes toward the railroad in the ye ars after the 1880s?  
(E) What arguments did the writers after the 1880s, as cited by Stilgoe, offer to 
justify their support for the railroad?  
8. According to the author of the passage, Stilgoe uses the phrase romantic -era 
distrust  (line 13) to imply that the view he is referring to was  
(A) the attitude of a minority of intellectuals toward technological innovation that 
began after 1830  
(B) a commonly held attitude toward the railroad during the 1830s  
(C) an ambivalent view of the railroad expressed by  many poets and novelists 
between 1880 and 1930  
(D) a critique of social and economic developments during the 1830s by a 
minority of intellectuals  
(E) an attitude toward the railroad that was disseminated by works of popular 
culture after 1880  
9. According to the author, the attitude toward the railroad that was reflected in 
writings of Henry James, Sinclair Lewis, and F. Scott Fitzgerald was  
(A) influenced by the writings of Frank Norris, Eugene O Neill, and Henry 
Adams  
(B) similar to that of the minority of writers who had expressed ambivalence 
toward the railroad prior to the 1880s  
(C) consistent with the public attitudes toward the railroad th at were reflected in 
works of popular culture after the 1880s  
(D) largely a reaction to the works of writers who had been severely critical of the 
railroad in the 1830s  
(E) consistent with the prevailing attitude toward the railroad during the 1830s  
10. It can be inferred from the passage that the author uses the phrase works of 
popular culture  (line 41) primarily to refer to the  
(A) work of a large group of writers  that was published between 1880 and 1930 
and that in Stilgoe s view was highly critical of the railroad  
(B) work of writers who were heavily influenced by Hawthorne and Thoreau  
(C) large volume of writing produced by Henry Adams, Sinclair Lewis, and 
Eugen e ONeill  
(D) work of journalists, novelists, and illustrators who were responsible for 
creating enthusiasm for the railroad during the 1830s   LSAT  695 
 (E) work of journalists, novelists, and illustrators that was published after 1880 
and that has received little attention from scholars other than Stilgoe  
11. Which one of the following can be inferred from the passage regarding the work 
of Frank Norri s, Eugene O Neill, and Henry Adams?  
(A) Their work never achieved broad popular appeal.  
(B) Their ideas were disseminated to a large audience by the popular culture of 
the early 1800s.  
(C) Their work expressed a more positive attitude toward the railroad t han did 
that of Henry James, Sinclair Lewis, and F. Scott Fitzgerald.  
(D) Although they were primarily novelists, some of their work could be 
classified as journalism.  
(E) Although they were influenced by Thoreau, their attitude toward the railroad 
was significantly different from his.  
12. It can be inferred from the passage that Stilgoe would be most likely to agree with 
which one of the following statements regardi ng the study of cultural history?  
(A) It is impossible to know exactly what period historians are referring to when 
they use the term romantic era.  
(B) The writing of intellectuals often anticipates ideas and movements that are 
later embraced by popular culture.  
(C) Writers who were not popular in their own time tell us little about the age in 
which they lived.  
(D) The works of popular culture can serve as a reliable indicator of public 
attitudes toward modern innovations like the railroad.  
(E) The best source of information concerning the impact of an event as large as 
the Industrial Revolution is the private letters and journals of individuals.  
13. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) evaluate one scholar s view of public attitu des toward the railroad in the 
United States from the early nineteenth to the early twentieth century  
(B) review the treatment of the railroad in American literature of the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries  
(C) survey the views of cultural historians rega rding the railroad s impact on 
major events in United States history  
(D) explore the origins of the public support for the railroad that existed after the 
completion of a national rail system in the United States  
(E) define what historians mean when they refer to the romantic -era distrust  of 
the railroad  
Three basic adaptive responses regulatory, acclimatory, and developmental may occur 
in organisms as they react to changing environmental conditions. In all t hree, adjustment of 
biological features (morphological adjustment) or of their use (functional adjustment) may 
occur. Regulatory responses involve rapid changes in the organism s use of its physiological 696 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 apparatus increasing or decreasing the rates of vari ous processes, for example. Acclimation 
involves morphological change thickening of fur or red blood cell proliferation which alters 
physiology itself. Such structural changes require more time than regulatory response changes. 
Regulatory and acclimatory r esponses are both reversible.  
Developmental responses, however, are usually permanent and irreversible: they become 
fixed in the course of the individual s development in response to environmental conditions at 
the time the response occurs. One such respon se occurs in many kinds of water bugs. Most 
water -bug species inhabiting small lakes and ponds have two generations per year. The first 
hatches during the spring, reproduces during the summer, then dies. The eggs laid in the 
summer hatch and develop into a dults in late summer. They live over the winter before 
breeding in early spring. Individuals in the second (overwintering) generation have fully 
developed wings and leave the water in autumn to overwinter in forests, returning in spring to 
small bodies of water to lay eggs. Their wings are absolutely necessary for this seasonal 
dispersal . The summer (early) generation, in contrast, is usually dimorphic some individuals 
have normal functional (macropterous) wings; others have much -reduced (micropterous) 
wings of no use for flight. The summer generation s dimorphism is a compromise strategy, for 
these individuals usually do not leave the ponds and thus generally have no use for fully 
developed wings. But small ponds occasionally dry up during the summer, fo rcing the water 
bugs to search for new habitats, an eventuality  that macropterous individuals are well adapted 
to meet.  
The dimorphism of micropterous and macropterous individuals in the summer generation 
expresse s developmental flexibility; it is not genetically determined. The individual s wing form 
is environmentally determined by the temperature to which developing eggs are exposed prior 
to their being laid. Eggs maintained in a warm environment always produce bugs with normal 
wing, but exposure to cold produces micropterous individuals. Eggs producing the 
overwintering brood are all formed during the late summer s warm temperatures. Hence, all 
individuals in the overwintering brood have normal wings. Eggs laid by the overwintering adults 
in the spring, which develop into the summer generation of adults, are formed in early autumn 
and early spring. Those eggs formed in autumn are exposed to cold winter temperatures, and 
thus produce micropterous adults in the sum mer generation. Those formed during the spring 
are never exposed to cold temperatures, and thus yield individuals with normal wing. Adult 
water bugs of the overwintering generation brought into  the laboratory during the cold months 
and kept warm, produce o nly macropterous offspring.  
14. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) illustrate an organism s functional adaptive response to changing 
environmental conditions  
(B) prove that organisms can exhibit three basic adaptive responses to changing 
environm ental conditions  
(C) explain the differences in form and function between micropterous and 
macropterous water bugs and analyze the effect of environmental changes on 
each 
(D) discuss three different types of adaptive responses and provide an example 
that e xplains how one of those types of responses works   LSAT  697 
 (E) contrast acclimatory responses with developmental responses and suggest an 
explanation for the evolutionary purposes of these two responses to changing 
environmental conditions  
15. The passage supplies information to suggest that which one of the f ollowing 
would happen if a pond inhabited by water bugs were to dry up in June?  
(A) The number of developmental responses among the water -bug population 
would decrease.  
(B) Both micropterous and macropterous water bugs would show an acclimatory 
response.  
(C) The generation of water bugs to be hatched during the subsequent spring 
would contain an unusually large number of macropterous individuals.  
(D) The dimorphism of the summer generation would enable some individuals to 
survive.  
(E) The dimorphism of the summer generation would be genetically transferred to 
the next spring generation.  
16. It can be inferred from the passage that if the winter months of a particular year 
were unusually warm, the  
(A) eggs formed by water bugs in  the autumn would probably produce a higher 
than usual proportion of macropterous individuals  
(B) eggs formed by water bugs in the autumn would probably produce an entire 
summer generation of water bugs with smaller than normal wings  
(C) eggs of the overwi ntering generation formed in the autumn would not be 
affected by this temperature change  
(D) overwintering generation would not leave the ponds for the forest during the 
winter  
(E) overwintering generation of water bugs would most likely form fewer eggs in 
the autumn and more in the spring  
17. According to the passage, the dimorphic wing structure of the summer generation 
of water bugs occurs because  
(A) the overwintering gen eration forms two sets of eggs, one exposed to the 
colder temperatures of winter and one exposed only to the warmer 
temperatures of spring  
(B) the eggs that produce micropterous and macropterous adults are 
morphologically different  
(C) water bugs respond t o seasonal changes by making an acclimatory functional 
adjustment in the wings  
(D) water bugs hatching in the spring live out their life spans in ponds and never 
need to fly  
(E) the overwintering generation, which produces eggs developing into the 
dimorphic generation, spends the winter in the forest and the spring in small 698 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 ponds  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that which one of the following is an example 
of a reg ulatory response?  
(A) thickening of the plumage of some birds in the autumn  
(B) increase in pulse rate during vigorous exercise  
(C) gradual darkening of the skin after exposure to sunlight  
(D) gradual enlargement of muscles as a result of weight lifting  
(E) development of a heavy fat layer in bears before hibernation  
19. According to the passage, the generation of water bugs hatching during the 
summer is likely to  
(A) be made up of equal numbers of macropterous and micropterous individuals  
(B) lay its eg gs during the winter in order to expose them to cold  
(C) show a marked inability to fly from one pond to another  
(D) exhibit genetically determined differences in wing form from the early 
spring -hatched generation  
(E) contain a much greater proportion of macropterous water bugs than the early 
spring -hatched generation  
20. The author mentions laboratory experiments with adult water bugs (lines 63 -66) 
in order to illustrate which one of the following?  
(A) the func tion of the summer generation s dimorphism  
(B) the irreversibility of most developmental adaptive responses in water bugs  
(C) the effect of temperature on developing water -bug eggs  
(D) the morphological difference between the summer generation and the 
overwintering generation of water bugs  
(E) the functional adjustment of water bugs in response to seasonal temperature 
variation  
21. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) Biological phenomena are presented, examples of their occurrence are 
compared a nd contrasted, and one particular example is illustrated in detail.  
(B) A description of related biological phenomena is stated, and two of those 
phenomena are explained in detail with illustrated examples.  
(C) Three related biological phenomena are descri bed, a hypothesis explaining 
their relationship is presented, and supporting evidence is produced.  
(D) Three complementary biological phenomena are explained, their causes are 
examined, and one of them is described by contrasting its causes with the 
other two. 
(E) A new way of describing biological phenomena is suggested, its applications 
are presented, and one specific example is examined in detail.   LSAT  699 
 The Constitution of the United States does not explicitly define the extent of the President s 
authority to involve  United States troops in conflicts with other nations in the absence of  a 
declaration of war. Instead, the question of the President s authority in this matter falls in the 
hazy area of concurrent  power, where authority is not expressly allocated to either the 
President or the Congress. The Constitution gives Congress the basic power to declare war, as 
well as the authority to raise and support a rmies and a navy, enact regulations for the control of 
the military, and provide for  the common defense. The President, on the other hand, in addition 
to being obligated to execute the laws of the land, including commitments negotiated by 
defense treaties, is named commander in chief of the armed forces and is empowered to 
appoint envoys and make treaties with the consent of the Senate. Although this allocation of 
powers does not expressly address the use of armed forces short o f a declared war, the spirit of 
the Constitution at least requires that Congress should be involved in the decision to deploy 
troops, and in passing the War Powers Resolution of 1973, Congress has at last reclaimed  a role 
in such decisions.  
Historically, United States  Presidents have not waited for the approval of Congress before 
involving United States troops in conflicts in which a state of war was not declared. One scholar 
has identified 1 99 military engagements that occurred without the consent of Congress, 
ranging from Jefferson s conflict with the Barbary  pirates to Nixon s invasion of Cambodia  
during the Vietnam conflict, which President Nixon argued was justified because his role as 
commander in chief  allowed him almost unlimited discretion  over the deployment of troops. 
However, the Vietnam conflict, never a declared war, represented a turning point in Congress s 
tolerance of presidential discretion in the deployment of troops in undeclared wars. Galvanized 
by the human and monetary cost of those hostilities  and showing a new determination to fulfill 
its proper role, Congress enacted the War Powers Resolution of 1973, a statute designed to 
ensure that the collective judgment of both Congress and the President would be applied to the 
involvement of Uni ted States troops in foreign conflicts.  
The resolution required the President, in the absence of a declaration of war, to consult 
with Congress in every possible instance  before introducing  forces  and to report to Congress 
within 48 hours after the force s have actually been deployed. Most important, the resolution 
allows Congress to veto the involvement once it begins, and requires the President, in most 
cases, to end the involvement within 60 days unless Congress specifically authorizes the 
military oper ation to continue. In its final section, by declaring the resolution is not intended to 
alter the constitutional authority of either Congress or the President, the resolution asserts that 
congressional involvement in decisions to use armed force is in acco rd with  the intent and spirit 
of the Constitution.  
22. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) showing how the Vietnam conflict led to a new interpretation of the 
Constitution s provisions for use of the military  
(B) arguing that the Wa r Powers Resolution of 1973 is an attempt to reclaim a 
share of constitutionally concurrent power that had been usurped by the 
President  
(C) outlining the history of the struggle between the President and Congress for 
control of the military  700 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (D) providing examples of conflicts inherent in the Constitution s approach to a 
balance of powers  
(E) explaining how the War Powers Resolution of 1973 alters the Constitution to 
eliminate an overlap of authority  
23. With regard to the use of United States troops in a foreign conflict without a 
formal declaration of war by the United States, the aut hor believes that the United 
States Constitution does which one of the following?  
(A) assumes that the President and Congress will agree on whether troops should 
be used  
(B) provides a clear -cut division of authority between the President and Congress 
in the decision to use troops  
(C) assigns a greater role to the Congress than to the President in deciding 
whether troops should be used  
(D) grants final authority to the President to decide whether to use troops  
(E) intends ( SIGNIFY , MEAN ) that both the President and Congress should be 
involved in the decision to use troops  
24. The passage suggests that each of the following contributed to Congress s 
enacting the War Powers Resolution of 1973 EXCEPT  
(A) a chan ge in the attitude in Congress toward exercising its role in the use of 
armed forces  
(B) the failure of Presidents to uphold commitments specified in defense treaties  
(C) Congress s desire to be consulted concerning United States military actions 
instigate d by the President  
(D) the amount of money spent on recent conflicts waged without a declaration of 
war 
(E) the number of lives lost in Vietnam  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the War Powers Resolution of 1973 is 
applicable only in the absence of a declaration of war  (lines 48 -49) because  
(A) Congress has enacted other laws that already se t out presidential requirements 
for situations in which war has been declared  
(B) by virtue of  declaring war, Congress already implicitly participates in the 
decision to deploy troops  
(C) the President generally receives broad pu blic support during wars that have 
been formally declared by Congress  
(D) Congress felt that the President should be allowed unlimited discretion in 
cases in which war has been declared  
(E) the United States Constitution already explicitly defines the r eporting and 
consulting requirements of the President in cases in which war has been 
declared   LSAT  701 
 26. In can be inferred from the passage that the author believes that the War Powers 
Resolution of 1973  
(A) is not in accord with the explicit roles of the Presid ent and Congress as 
defined in the Constitution  
(B) interferes with the role of the President as commander in chief of the armed 
forces  
(C) signals Congress s commitment to fulfill a role intended for it by the 
Constitution  
(D) fails explicitly to address the use of armed forces in the absence of a 
declaration of war  
(E) confirms the role historically assumed by Presidents  
27. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to agree 
with which one of the following statements rega rding the invasion of Cambodia?  
(A) Because it was undertaken without the consent of Congress, it violated the 
intent and spirit of the Constitution.  
(B) Because it galvanized support for the War Powers Resolution, it contributed 
indirectly to the expansio n of presidential authority.  
(C) Because it was necessitated by a defense treaty, it required the consent of 
Congress.  
(D) It served as a precedent for a new interpretation of the constitutional limits on 
the President s authority to deploy troops.  
(E) It differed from the actions of past Presidents in deploying United States 
troops in conflicts without a declaration of war by Congress.  
28. According to the provisions of the War Powers Resolution of 1973 as described 
in the passage, if the Presid ent perceives that an international conflict warrants 
the immediate involvement of United States armed forces, the President is 
compelled in every instance to  
(A) request that Congress consider a formal declaration of war  
(B) consult with the leaders of bo th house of Congress before deploying armed 
forces  
(C) desist from deploying any troops unless expressly approved by Congress  
(D) report to Congress within 48 hours of the deployment of armed forces  
(E) withdraw any armed forces deployed in such a conflict within 60 days unless 
war is declared  
LSAT   03    SECTION II  
Time  35 minutes  27 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basi s of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 702 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
The extent of a nation s power over its coastal ecosystems and the natural resources  in its 
coastal waters has been defined by two international law doctrines: freedom of the seas and 
adjacent state sovereignty. Until the mid -twentieth century, most nations favored application of 
broad open -seas freedoms and limited sovereign rig hts over coastal waters. A nation had the 
right to include within its territorial dominion only a very narrow band of coastal waters 
(generally extending three miles from the shoreline), within which it had the authority but not 
the responsibility, to regu late all activities. But, because this area of territorial dominion was so 
limited, most nations did not establish rules for management or protection of their territorial 
waters.  
Regardless of whether or not nations enforced regulations in their territoria l waters, large 
ocean areas remained free of controls or restrictions. The citizens of all nations had the right to 
use these unrestricted ocean areas for any innocent purpose, including navigation and fishing. 
Except for  controls over its own citizens, no nation had the responsibility, let alone the unilateral 
authority, to control such activities in international waters. And, since there were few standards 
of conduct that applied on the open seas , there were few jurisdictional  conflicts between 
nations.  
The lack of standards is traceable to popular perceptions held before the middle of this 
century. By and large, marine pollution was not perceived as a significant problem, in part  
because the adverse effect of coastal activities on ocean ecosystems was not widely recognized, 
and pollution caused by human activities was generally believed to be limited to that caused by 
navigation . Moreover, the freedom to fish, or overfis h, was an essential element of the 
traditional legal doctrine of freedom of the seas that no maritime  country  wished to see limited. 
And finally, the technology that later allowed exploitatio n of other ocean resources, such as oil, 
did not yet exist.  
To date, controlling pollution and regulating ocean resources have still not been 
comprehensively addressed by law, but international law established through the customs and 
practices of nations does not preclude such efforts. And two recent developments may 
actually lead to future international rules providing for ecosystem management . First, the 
establishment of extensive fishery zones extending territorial authority as far as 200 miles out 
from a country s coast, has provided the opportunity for nations individually to manage larger 
ecosystems. This opportunity, combined with national self -interest in maintaining fish 
populations, could lead nations to reevaluate policies for management of their fisheries and to 
address the problem of pollution in territorial waters . Second, the international community is 
beginning to understand the importance of preserving the resources and ecology of 
international waters and to show s igns of accepting responsibility for doing so. As an 
international consensus regarding the need for comprehensive management of ocean 
resources develops, it will become more likely that  international standards and policies for 
broader regulation of human a ctivities that affect ocean ecosystems will be adopted and 
implemented.  
1. According to the passage, until the mid -twentieth century there were few 
jurisdictional disputes over international waters because.   LSAT  703 
 (A) the nearest coastal nation regulated activiti es 
(B) few controls or restrictions applied to ocean areas  
(C) the ocean areas were used for only innocent purposes  
(D) the freedom of the seas doctrine settled all claims concerning navigation and 
fishing  
(E) broad authority over international waters w as shared equally among all 
nations  
2. According to the international law doctrines applicable before the mid -twentieth 
century, if commercial activity within a particular nation s territorial waters 
threatened all marine life in those waters, the nation w ould have been  
(A) formally censured by an international organization for not properly regulating 
marine activities  
(B) called upon by other nations to establish rules to protect its territorial waters  
(C) able but not required to place legal limits on suc h commercial activities  
(D) allowed to resolve the problem at it own discretion providing it could contain 
the threat to its own territorial waters  
(E) permitted to hold the commercial offenders liable only if they were citizens of 
that particular natio n 
3. The author suggests that, before the mid -twentieth century, most nations  actions 
with respect to territorial and international waters indicated that  
(A) managing ecosystems in either territorial or international waters was given 
low priority  
(B) unli mited resources in international waters resulted in little interest in 
territorial waters  
(C) nations considered it their responsibility to protect territorial but not 
international waters  
(D) a nation s authority over its citizenry ended at territorial li nes 
(E) although nations could extend their territorial dominion beyond three miles 
from their shoreline, most chose not to do so  
4. The author cites which one of the following as an effect of the extension of 
territorial waters beyond the three -mile li mit? 
(A) increased political pressure on individual nations to establish comprehensive 
laws regulating ocean resources  
(B) a greater number of jurisdictional disputes among nations over the regulation 
of fishing on the open seas  
(C) the opportunity for som e nations to manage large ocean ecosystems  
(D) a new awareness of the need to minimize pollution caused by navigation  
(E) a political incentive for smaller nations to solve the problems of pollution in 
their coastal waters  704 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 5. According to the passage, before the middle of the twentieth century, nations 
failed to establish rules protecting their territorial waters beca use 
(A) the waters appeared to be unpolluted and to contain unlimited resources  
(B) the fishing industry would be adversely affected by such rules  
(C) the size of the area that would be subject to such rules was insignificant  
(D) the technology needed for pollution control and resource management did not 
exist  
(E) there were few jurisdictional conflicts over nations  territorial waters  
6. The passage as a whole can best be described as  
(A) a chronology of the events that have led up to present -day crisis  
(B) a legal inquiry into the abuse of existing laws an d the likelihood of reform  
(C) a political analysis of the problems inherent in directing national attention to 
an international issue  
(D) a historical analysis of a problem that requires international attention  
(E) a proposal for adopting and implement ing international standards to solve an 
ecological problem  
The human species came into being at the time of the greatest biological diversity in the 
history of the Earth. Today, as human populations expand and alter the natural environment, 
they are reduci ng biological diversity to its lowest level since the end of the Mesozoic  era, 65 
million years ago. The ultimate consequences of this biological collision are beyond calculation, 
but they are certain to be harmful. That, in essence , is the biodiversity crisis.  
The history of global diversity can be summarized as follows : after the initial flowering of 
multicellular animals, there was a swift rise in the number of species in early Paleozoic times 
(between 6 00 and 430 million years ago), then plateaulike stagnation for the remaining 200 
million years of the Paleozoic era, and finally a slow but steady climb through the Mesozoic and 
Cenozoic eras to diversity s all-time high. This history suggests that biologi cal diversity was hard 
won and a long time in coming.  Furthermore, this pattern of increase was set back  by five 
massive extinction episodes. The most recent of these, during the Cretaceous period, is by far  
the most famous, because it ended the age of the dinosaurs, conferred  hegemony on the 
mammals, and ultimately made possible the ascendancy of the human species. But the 
cretaceous crisis was minor compared with the Permian  extinctions 240 million years ago, 
during which between 77 and 96 percent of marine animal species perished. It took 5 million 
years, well into Mesozoic times, for species diversity to begin a significant recovery.  
Within the past 10,000 years biological dive rsity has entered a wholly new era. Human 
activity has had a devastating effect on species diversity, and the rate of human -induced 
extinctions is accelerating. Half of the bird species of Polynesia  have been eliminated through 
hunting and the destruction of native forests. Hundreds of fish species endemic to Lake Victoria 
are now threatened with extinction following the careless introduction of one species of fish, 
the Nile perch. The list of such biogeographic  disasters is extensive.  
Because every species  is unique and irreplaceable , the loss of biodiversity is the most 
profound process of environmental change. Its consequences are also the least predictable  LSAT  705 
 because the value of Earth s biota (the fauna and flora collectively) remains largely unstudied 
and unappreciated; unlike material and cultural wealth, which we understand because they are 
the substance  of our everyday lives, biological wealth is usually taken for granted. This is a 
serious strategic err or, one that will be increasingly regretted as time passes. The biota is not 
only part of a country s heritage, the product of millions of years of evolution centered on that 
place; it is also a potential source for immense untapped material wealth in the form of food, 
medicine, and other commercially important substance.  
7. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) The reduction in biodiversity is an irreversible process that represents a 
setback both for science and for s ociety as a whole.  
(B) The material and cultural wealth of a nation are insignificant when compared 
with the country s biological wealth.  
(C) The enormous diversity of life on Earth could not have come about without 
periodic extinctions that have conferred  preeminence on one species at the 
expense of another.  
(D) The human species is in the process of initiating a massive extinction episode 
that may make past episodes look minor by comparison . 
(E) The current decline in species diversity is human -induced tragedy of 
incalculable proportions that has potentially grave consequences for the 
human species.  
8. Which one of the following situations is most analogous to the history of global 
diversity summarized in lines 10-18 of the pas sage?  
(A) The number of fish in a lake declines abruptly as a result of water pollution, 
then makes a slow comeback  after cleanup efforts and the passage of 
ordinances against dumping.  
(B) The concentration of chlorine in the water supply of large city fluctuates 
widely before stabilizing at a constant and safe level.  
(C) An old -fashioned article of clothing  goes in and out of style periodically as a 
result of features in fashion magazines and the popularity of certain period 
films.  
(D) After valuable mineral deposits are discovered, the population of a 
geographic region booms then levels off  and begins to decrease at a slow 
and steady pace.  
(E) The variety of styles stocked by a shoe store increases rapidly after the store 
opens, holds constant for many months, and then gradually creeps upward.  
9. The author suggests which one of the following about the Cretaceous crisis?  
(A) It was the s econd most devastating extinction episode in history.  
(B) It was the most devastating extinction episode up until that time.  
(C) It was less devastating to species diversity than is the current biodiversity 
crisis.  706 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (D) The rate of extinction among marine a nimal species as a result of the crisis 
did not approach 77 percent.  
(E) The dinosaurs comprised the great majority of species that perished during the 
crisis.  
10. The author mentions the Nile perch in order to provide an example of  
(A) a species that has become extinct through human activity  
(B) the typical lack of for esight that has led to biogeographic disaster  
(C) a marine animal species that survived the Permian extinctions  
(D) a species that is a potential source of material wealth  
(E) the kind of action that is necessary to reverse the decline in species divers ity 
11. All of the following are explicitly mentioned in the passage as contributing to the 
extinction of species EXCEPT  
(A) hunting  
(B) pollution  
(C) deforestation  
(D) the growth of human populations  
(E) human -engineered changes in the environment  
12. The passage suggests which one of the following about material and cultural 
wealth?  
(A) Because we can readily assess the value of material and cultural wealth, we 
tend not to take them for granted.  
(B) Just as the biota is a source of potential material w ealth, it is an untapped 
source of cultural wealth as well.  
(C) Some degree of material and cultural wealth may have to be sacrificed if we 
are to protect our biological heritage.  
(D) Material and cultural wealth are of less value than biological wealth be cause 
they have evolved over a shorter period of time.  
(E) Material wealth and biological wealth are interdependent in a way that 
material wealth and cultural wealth are not.  
13. The author would be most likely to agree with which one of the following 
statements about the consequences of the biodiversity crisis?  
(A) The loss of species diversity will have as immediate an impact on the material 
of nations as on their biological wealth.  
(B) The crisis will likely end the hegemony of the human race and brin g about the 
ascendancy of another species.  
(C) The effects of the loss of species diversity will be dire, but we cannot yet tell 
how dire.  
(D) It is more fruitful to discuss the consequences of the crisis in terms of the  LSAT  707 
 potential loss to humanity than in strictly biological loss to humanity than in 
strictly biological terms.  
(E) The consequences of the crisis can be minimized, but the pace of extinctions 
can not be reversed.  
Women s participation in the revolutionary events in France between 1789 and 17 95 has 
only recently been given nuanced  treatment. Early twentieth century historians of the French 
Revolution are typified by Jaures, who, though sympathetic to the women s movement of his 
own time, never even mention s its antecedents in revolutionary France. Even today most 
general histories treat only cursorily a few individual women, like Marie Antoinette. The recent 
studies by Landes, Badinter, Godineau, and Roudinesco, however, should  signal a much -needed 
reassess ment of women s participation.  
Godineau and Roudinesco point  to three significant phases in that participation. The first, 
up to mi d-1792, involved those women who wrote political tracts . Typical of their orientation to 
theoretical issues in Godineaus s view, wit hout practical effect is Marie Gouze s Declaration of 
the Right of Women . The emergence of vocal middle -class women s political clubs marks the 
second phase.  Formed in 1791 as adjuncts of middle -class male political clubs, and originally 
philanthropic in f unction, by late 1792 independent clubs of women began to advocate military 
participation for women. In the final phase, the famine of 1795 occasioned  a mass women s 
movement: women seized food supplies , hold officials hostage, and argued for the 
implementation of democratic politics. This phase ended in May of 1795 with the military 
suppression of this multiclass movement. In all three phases women s participation in politics 
contrasted markedly w ith their participation before 1789. Before that date some noblewomen 
participated indirectly in elections, but such participation by more than a narrow range of the 
population women or men came only with the Revolution.  
What makes the recent studies parti cularly compelling, however, is not so much their 
organization of chronology as their unflinching  willingness to confront the reasons for the 
collapse of the women s movement. For Landes and Badinte r, the necessity of womens having 
to speak in the established vocabularies of certain intellectual and political tradition diminished 
the ability of the women s movement to resist suppression. Many women, and many men, they 
argue, located  their vision within the confining  tradition  of Jean -Jacques Rousseau, who linked 
male and female roles with public and private spheres respectively . But, when women went on 
to make political alliances with radical Jacobin  men, Badinter asserts, they adopted a 
vocabulary and a violently  extremist  viewpoint  that unfortunately w as even more damaging to 
their political interests.  
Each of these scholars has different political agenda and takes a different 
approach Godineau, for example, works with police archives while Roudinesco uses 
explanatory schema from modern psychology. Yet , admirably, each gives center stage to a 
group that previously has been marginalized, or at best undifferentiated, by historians. And in 
the case of Landes and Badinter, the reader is left with a sobering  awarene ss of the cost to the 
women of the Revolution of speaking in borrowed voices . 
14. Which one of the following best states the main point of the passage?  
(A) According to recent historical studies, the participation of women in the 708 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 revolutionary events of 17 89-1795 can most profitably be viewed in three 
successive stages.  
(B) The findings of certain recent historical studies have resulted from an earlier 
general reassessment, by historians, of women s participation in the 
revolutionary events of 1789 -1795.  
(C) Adopting the vocabulary and viewpoint of certain intellectual and political 
traditions resulted in no political advantage for women in France in the years 
1789 -1795.  
(D) Certain recent historical studies have provided a much -needed description 
and evalua tion of the evolving roles of women in the revolutionary events of 
1789 -1795.  
(E) Historical studies that seek to explain the limitations of the women s 
movement is more convincing than are those that seek only to describe the 
general features of that m ovement.  
15. The passage suggests that Godineau would be likely to agree with which one of 
the following statements about Marie Gouze s Declaration of the Rights of 
Women?  
(A) This work was not understood by many of Gouze s contemporaries.  
(B) This work in directly inspired the formation of independent women s political 
clubs.  
(C) This work had little impact on the world of political action.  
(D) This work was the most compelling produced by a French woman between 
1789 and 1792.  
(E) This work is typical of the kind of writing French women produced between 
1793 and 1795.  
16. According to the passage, which one of the following is a true statement about the 
purpose of the women s political cubs mentioned in line 20 ? 
(A) These cl ubs fostered a mass women s movement.  
(B) These clubs eventually developed a purpose different from their original 
purpose.  
(C) These clubs were founder to advocate military participation for women.  
(D) These clubs counteracted the original purpose of male  political clubs.  
(E) These clubs lost their direction by the time of the famine of 1795.  
17. The primary function of the first paragraph of the passage is to:  
(A) outline the author s argument about women s roles in Frances between 1789 
and 1795  
(B) anticipate possible  challenges to the findings of the recent studies of women 
in France between 1789 and 1795  
(C) summarize some long -standing explanations of the role of individual women  LSAT  709 
 in France between 1789 and 1795  
(D) present a context for the discussion of recent stud ies of women in France 
between 1789 and 1795  
(E) characterize various eighteenth -century studies of women in France  
18. The passage suggests that Landes and Badinter would be likely to agree with 
which one of the following statements about the women s movement in France in 
the 1790s?  
(A) The move ment might have been more successful if women had developed 
their own political vocabularies.  
(B) The downfall of the movement was probably unrelated to it alliance with 
Jacobin men.  
(C) The movement had a great deal of choice about whether to adopt a 
Rous seauist political vocabulary.  
(D) The movement would have triumphed if it had not been suppressed by 
military means.  
(E) The movement viewed a Rousseauist political tradition, rather than a Jacobin 
political ideology, as detrimental to its interests.  
19. In the context of the passage, the word cost in line 63  refers to the  
(A) dichotomy of private roles for women a nd public roles for men  
(B) almost nonexistent political participation of women before 1789  
(C) historians  lack of differentiation among various groups of women  
(D) political alliances women made with radical Jacobin men  
(E) collapse of the women s mov ement in the 1790s  
20. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) criticizing certain political and intellectual traditions  
(B) summarizing the main points of several recent historical studies and assessing 
their value  
(C) establishing a chr onological sequence and arguing for its importance  
(D) comparing and contrasting women s political activities before and after the 
French Revolution  
(E) reexamining a long -held point of view and isolating its strengths and 
weaknesses  
Art historians  approach to French Impressionism has changed significantly in recent years.  
While a decade ago Rewald s History of Impressionism , which emphasizes Impr essionist 
painters  stylistic innovations, was unchallenged, the literature  on impressionism has now 
become a kind of ideological battlefield, in which more attention is paid to the sub ject matter of 
the paintings, and to the social and moral issues raised by it, than to their style. Recently, 
politically charged discussions that address the impressionists  unequal treatment of men and 
women and the exclusion of modern industry and labor  from their pictures have tended to 710 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 crowd out  the stylistic analysis favored by Rewald and his followers. In a new work illustrating 
this trend, Robert L. Herbert dissociates himself from formalists whose preoccupation with the 
stylistic features of impressionist painting has, in Herbert s view, left the history out of art 
history; his aim is to restore impressionist paintings to their sociocultural context.  However, 
his arguments are not finally persuasive.  
In attempting to place impressionist painting in its proper historical context, Herbert has 
redrawn the traditional boundaries of impressionism. Limiting himself to the two decades 
between 1860 and 1880 , he assembles under the impressionist banner what can only be 
described as a  somewhat eccentric grouping of painters. Cezanne, Pisarro, and Sisley are 
almost entirely ignored, largely because their paintings do not suit Herbert s emphasis on 
themes of urban life and suburban leisure, while Manet, Degas, and Caillebotte who paint 
scenes of urban life but whom many would hardly characterize as impressionists dominate the 
first half of the book. Although this new description of Impressionist painting provides a more 
unified conception of nineteenth -century French painting by grouping quite disparate modernist 
painters together and emphasizing their common concerns rather than their stylistic difference , 
it also forces Herbert to overlook some of the most important genres of impressionist 
painting portraiture, pure landscape, and still -life painting.  
Moreover, the rationale for Herbert s emphasis on the social and political realities that 
Impressionist painting s can be said to communicate rather than on their style is finally 
undermined by what even Herbert concedes was the failure of Im pressionist painters to serve 
as particularly conscientious illustrators of their social milieu . They left much ordinary 
experience work and poverty , for example out of their paintings and what they did put in was 
transformed by a style that had only an in direct relationship to the social realities of the world 
they depicted . Not only were their pictures inventions  rather than photographs , they were 
inventions in which style to some degree disrupted description. Their painting in effect have two 
levels of s ubject : what is represented and how it is represented, and no art historian can afford 
to emphasize one at the expense of the other.  
21. Which one of the following best expresses the main point of the passage?  
(A) The style of impressionist paintings has o nly an indirect relation to their 
subject matter.  
(B) The approach to impressionism that is illustrated by Herbert s recent book is 
inadequate.  
(C) The historical context of impressionist paintings is not relevant to their 
interpretation.  
(D) impressionism  emerged from a historical context of ideological conflict and 
change.  
(E) Any adequate future interpretation of impressionism will have to come to 
terms with Herbert s view of this art movement.  
22. According to the passage, Rewald s book on impression ism was characterized by 
which one of the following?  
(A) evenhanded objectivity about the achievements of impressionism   LSAT  711 
 (B) bias in favor of certain impressionist painters  
(C) an emphasis on the stylistic features of impressionist painting  
(D) an idiosyncr atic view of which painters were to be classified as impressionists  
(E) a refusal to enter into the ideological debates that had characterized earlier 
discussions of impressionism  
23. The author implies that Herbert s redefinition of the boundaries of impressionism 
resulted from which one of the following?  
(A) an exclu sive emphasis on form and style  
(B) a bias in favor of the representation of modern industry  
(C) an attempt to place impressionism within a specific sociocultural context  
(D) a broadening of the term impressionism to include all nineteenth -century 
French p ainting  
(E) an insufficient familiarity with earlier interpretations of impressionism  
24. The author states which one of the following about modern industry and labor as 
subjects for painting?  
(A) The impressionists neglected these subjects in their paintings.  
(B) Herbert s book on impressionism fails to give adequate treatment of these 
subjects.  
(C) The impressionists  treatment of these subjects was idealized.  
(D) Rewald s treatment of impressionist painters focused inordinately on their 
representations of th ese subjects.  
(E) Modernist painters presented a distorted picture of these subjects.  
25. Which one of the following most accurately describes the structure of the 
author s argument in the passage?  
(A) The first two paragraphs each present independent arguments for a conclusion 
that is drawn in the third paragraph.  
(B) A thesis is stated in the first paragraph and revised in the second paragraph 
and revised in the second paragraph, and the revised thesis is supported with 
argument in the third paragraph.  
(C) The firs t two paragraphs discuss and criticize a thesis, and the third paragraph 
presents an alternative thesis.  
(D) a claim is made in the first paragraph, and the next two paragraph, and the 
next two paragraphs each present reasons for accepting that claim.  
(E) An argument is presented in the first paragraph, a counterargument is 
presented in the second paragraph, and the third paragraph suggests a way to 
resolve the dispute.  
26. The author s statement that impressionist paintings were inventions in whic h 
style to some degree disrupted description  (lines 57 -59) serves to  
(A) strengthen the claim that impressionist sought to emphasize the differences 712 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 between painting and photography  
(B) weaken the argument that style is the only important feature of impre ssionist 
paintings  
(C) indicate that impressionists recognized that they had been strongly influence 
by photography  
(D) support the argument that an exclusive emphasis on the impressionists subject 
matter is mistaken  
(E) undermine the claim that impressionists neglected certain kinds of subject 
matter  
27. The author would most likely regard a book on the impressionists that focused 
entirely on their style as  
(A) a product of the recent confusion caused by Herbert s book on impressionism  
(B) emphasizing what impressionists themselves took to be their primary artistic 
concern  
(C) an overreaction against the traditional interpretation of impressionism  
(D) neglecting the most innovative aspects of impressionism  
(E) a ddressing only part of what an adequate treatment should cover  
LSAT   04    SECTION IV  
Time  35 minutes  27 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the  passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the correspondi ng space on your answer sheet.  
Governments of developing countries occasionally enter into  economic development 
agreements  with foreign investors who provide capital and technological expertise that may not 
be readily availabl e in such countries. Besides the normal economic risk that accompanies such 
enterprises, investors face the additional risk that the host government may attempt unilaterally 
to change in its favor the terms of the agreement or even to terminate the agreeme nt 
altogether and appropriate the project for itself. In order to make economic development 
agreements more attractive to investors, some developing countries have attempted to 
strengthen the security of such agreements with clauses specifying that the agr eements will be 
governed by general principles of law recognized by civilized nations a set of legal principles 
or rules shared by the worlds major legal systems. However, advocates of governments 
freedom to modify or terminate such agreements argue th at these agreements fall within  a 
special class of contracts known as administrative contracts, a concept that originated in French 
law. They assert that under the theory of administrative contracts, a government retains 
inherent power to modify or terminate its own contract, and t hat this power indeed constitutes 
a general principle of law. However, their argument is flawed on at least two counts.  
First, in French law not all government contracts are treated as administrative contracts.  LSAT  713 
 Some contracts are designated as administrati ve by specific statute, in which case the 
contractor is made aware of the applicable legal rules upon entering into agreement with the 
government. Alternatively, the contracting government agency can itself designate a contract 
as administrative by includi ng certain terms not found in private civil contracts. Moreover, even 
in the case of administrative contracts, French law requires that in the event that the 
government unilaterally modifies the terms of the contract, it must compensate the contractor 
for any increased burden resulting from the governments action. In effect, the government is 
thus prevented from modifying those contractual terms that define the financial balance of the 
contract.  
Second, the French law of administrative contracts, although adopted by several countries, 
is not so universally accepted that it can be embraced as a general principle of law. In both the 
United States and the United Kingdom, government contracts are governed by the ordinary law 
of contracts, with the result that t he government can reserve the power to modify or terminate 
a contract unilaterally only by writing such power into the contract as a specific provision. 
Indeed, the very fact that termination and modification clauses are commonly found in 
government contra cts suggests that a governments capacity to modify or terminate 
agreements unilaterally derives from specific contract provisions, not from inherent state 
power.  
1. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with doing which one of the 
following?  
(A) pointing out flaws in an argument provided in support of a position  
(B) analyzing the weaknesses inherent in the proposed solution to a problem  
(C) marshaling evidence in support of a new explanation of a phenomenon  
(D) analyzing the risks inherent in a dopting a certain course of action  
(E) advocating a new approach to a problem that has not been solved by 
traditional means  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to agree 
with which one of the following assertions r egarding the general principles of 
law mentioned in lines 16 -17 of the passage?  
(A) They fail to take into account the special needs and interests of developing 
countries that enter into agreements with foreign investors.  
(B) They have only recently been  invoked as criteria for adjudicating disputes 
between governments and foreign investors.  
(C) They are more compatible with the laws of France and the United States than 
with those of the United Kingdom.  
(D) They do not assert that governments have an inhe rent right to modify 
unilaterally the terms of agreements that they have entered into with foreign 
investors.  
(E) They are not useful in adjudicating disputes between developing countries 
and foreign investors.  
3. The author implies that which one of th e following is true of economic 714 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 development agreements?  
(A) They provide greater economic benefits to the governments that are parties to 
such agreements than to foreign investors.  
(B) They are interpreted differently by courts in the United Kingdom than t hey 
are by courts in the United States.  
(C) They have proliferated in recent years as a result of governments attempts to 
make them more legally secure.  
(D) They entail greater risk to investors when the governments that enter into 
such agreements reserve  the right to modify unilaterally the terms of the 
agreements.  
(E) They have become less attractive to foreign investors as an increasing number 
of governments that enter into such agreements consider them governed by 
the law of ordinary contracts.  
4. According to the author , which one of the following is true of a contract that is 
designated by a French government agency as an administrative contract?  
(A) It requires the government agency to pay for unanticipated increases in the 
cost of delivering the goods and services specified in the contract.  
(B) It provides the contractor with certain guarantees that are not normally 
provided in private civil contracts.  
(C) It must be ratified by the passage of a statute.  
(D) It discourages foreign companies from b idding on the contract.  
(E) It contains terms that distinguish it from a private civil contract.  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that under the ordinary law of contracts 
(lines 53 -54), a government would have the right to modify unilaterally th e terms 
of a contract that it had entered into with a foreign investor if which one of the 
following were true?  
(A) The government undertook a greater economic risk by entering into the 
contract than did the foreign investor.  
(B) The cost to the foreign in vestor of abiding by the terms of the contract 
exceeded the original estimates of such costs.  
(C) The modification of the contract did not result in any increased financial 
burden for the investor.  
(D) Both the government and the investor had agreed to abi de by the general 
principles of law recognized by civilized nations.  
(E) The contract contains a specific provision allowing the government to modify 
the contract.  
6. In the last paragraph, the author refers to government contracts in the United 
States and the United Kingdom primarily in order to  
(A) Cite two governments that often reserve the right to modify unilaterally 
contracts that they enter into with foreign investors.   LSAT  715 
 (B) Support the assertion that there is no general principle of law governing 
contracts between private individuals and governments.  
(C) Cast doubt on the alleged universality of the concept of administrative 
contracts.  
(D) Provide examples of legal systems that might benefit from the concept of 
administrative contracts.  
(E) Provide examples of characteristics that typically distinguish government 
contracts from private civil contracts.  
7. Which one of the following best states the authors main conclusion in the 
passage?  
(A) Providing that an international agreement be governed by general principles 
of law is not a viable method of guaranteeing the legal security of such an 
agreement.  
(B) French law regarding contracts is significantly different from those in the 
United States and the United Kingdom.  
(C) Contracts betw een governments and private investors in most nations are 
governed by ordinary contract law.  
(D) An inherent power of a government to modify or terminate a contract cannot 
be considered a general principle of law.  
(E) Contracts between governments and private investors can be secured only by 
reliance on general principles of law.  
8. The authors argument in lines 57 -62 would be most weakened if which one of 
the following were true?  
(A) The specific provisions of  government contracts often contain explicit 
statements of what all parties to the contracts already agree are inherent state 
powers.  
(B) Governments are more frequently put in the position of having to modify or 
terminate contracts than are private indivi duals.  
(C) Modification clauses in economic development agreements have frequently 
been challenged in international tribunals by foreign investors who were a 
party to such agreements.  
(D) The general principles of law provide that modification clauses cann ot allow 
the terms of a contract to be modified in such a way that the financial 
balance of the contract is affected.  
(E) Termination and modification agreements are often interpreted differently by 
national courts than they are by international tribuna ls. 
Nico Frijda writes that emotions are governed by a psychological principle called the law 
of apparent reality: emotions are elicited only by events appraised as real, and the intensity of 
these emotions corresponds to the degree to which these events  are appraised as real. This 
observation seems psychologically plausible, but emotional responses elicited by works of art 
raise counterexamples . 716 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 Frijdas law accounts for my panic if I am afraid of snakes and see an object I correctly 
appraise as a rattle snake, and also for my identical response if I see a coiled garden hose I 
mistakenly perceive to be a snake. However, suppose I am watching a movie and see a snake 
gliding toward its victim. Surely I might experience the same emotions of panic and distress , 
though I know the snake is not real. These responses extend even to phenomena not 
conventionally accepted as real. A movie about ghosts, for example, may be terrifying to all 
viewers, even those who firmly reject the possibility of ghosts, but this is no t because viewers 
are confusing cinematic depiction with reality. Moreover, I can feel strong emotions in response 
to objects of art that are interpretations, rather than representations, of reality: I am moved by 
Mozarts Requiem , but I know that I am not  at a real funeral. However, if Frijdas law is to 
explain all emotional reactions, there should be no emotional response at all to aesthetic 
objects or events, because we know they are not real in the way a living rattlesnake is real . 
Most psychologists, perplexed by the feelings they acknowledge are aroused by aesthetic 
experience, have claimed that these emotions are genuine, but different in kind from 
nonaesthetic emotions. This, however, is a descriptive distinction rather than an empirical 
observation  and consequently lacks explanatory value. On the other hand, Gombrich argues 
that emotional responses to art are ersatz; art triggers remembrances of previously 
experienced emotions. These debates have prompted the psychologist Radford to argue that 
peopl e do experience real melancholy or joy in responding to art, but that these are irrational 
responses precisely because people know they are reacting to illusory stimuli. Frijdas law does 
not help us to untangle these positions, since it simply implies tha t events we recognize as 
being represented rather than real cannot elicit emotion in the first place . 
Frijda does suggest that a vivid imagination has properties of reality implying, without 
explanation, that we make aesthetic objects or events real in the act of experiencing them. 
However, as Scruton argues, a necessary characteristic of th e imaginative construction that can 
occur in an emotional response to art is that the person knows he or she is pretending. This is 
what distinguishes imagination from psychotic fantasy.  
9. Which one of the following best states the central idea of the pas sage?  
(A) The law of apparent reality fails to account satisfactorily for the emotional 
nature of belief.  
(B) Theories of aesthetic response fail to account for how we distinguish 
unreasonable from reasonable responses to art.  
(C) The law of apparent reali ty fails to account satisfactorily for emotional 
responses to art.  
(D) Psychologists have been unable to determine what accounts for the 
changeable nature of emotional responses to art.  
(E) Psychologists have been unable to determine what differentiates  aesthetic 
from nonaesthetic emotional responses.  
10. According to the passage, Frijdas law asserts that emotional responses to events 
are 
(A) unpredictable because emotional responses depend on how aware the person 
is of the reality of an event   LSAT  717 
 (B) weaker if the person cannot distinguish illusion from reality  
(C) more or less intense depending on the degree to which the person perceives 
the event to be real  
(D) more intense if the person perceives an event to be frightening  
(E) weaker if the person judges an event to be real but unthreatening  
11. The author suggests that Frijdas notion of the role of imagination in aesthetic 
response is problematic because it  
(A) ignore the unselfconsciousness that is characteristic of e motional responses to 
art 
(B) ignores the distinction between genuine emotion and ersatz emotion  
(C) ignores the fact that a person who is imagining knows that he or she is 
imagining  
(D) makes irrelevant distinctions between vivid and weak imaginative capa cities  
(E) suggests, in reference to the observation of art, that there is no distinction 
between real and illusory stimuli  
12. The passage supports all of the following statements about the differences 
between Gombrich and Radford EXCEPT:  
(A) Radfods argume nt relies on a notion of irrationality in a way that 
Gomgbrichs argument does not.  
(B) Gmbrichs position is closer to the position of the majority of psychologists 
than is Radfords.  
(C) Gombrich, unlike Radford, argues that we do not have true emotions in 
response to art.  
(D) Gombrichs argument rests on a notion of memory in a way that Radfords 
argument does not.  
(E) Radfords argument, unlike Gombrichs, is not focused on the artificial 
quality of emotional responses to art.  
13. Which one of the following best capture s the progression of the authors 
argument in lines 9 -31? 
(A) The emotional responses to events ranging from the real to the depicted 
illustrate the irrationality of emotional response.  
(B) A series of events that range from the real to the depicted conveys the contrast 
between real events and cinematic depiction.  
(C) An intensification in emo tional response to a series of events that range from 
the real to the depicted illustrates Frijdas law.  
(D) A progression of events that range from the real to the depicted examines the 
precise nature of panic in relation to feared object.  
(E) The consistency of emotional responses to events that range from the real to 
the depicted challenges Frijdas law.  718 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 14. Authors assertions concerning movies about ghosts imply that all of the 
following statements are false EXCEPT : 
(A) Movies about ghosts are terrifying in proportion to viewers beliefs in the 
phenomenon of ghosts.  
(B) Movies about imaginary phenomena like ghosts may be just as terrifying as 
movies about phenomena like snake.  
(C) Movies about ghosts and snakes are not terrifying beca use people know that 
what they viewing is not real.  
(D) Movies about ghosts are terrifying to viewers who previously rejected the 
possibility of ghosts because movies permanently alter the viewers sense of 
reality.  
(E) Movies about ghosts elicit a very different  emotional response from viewers 
who do not believe in ghosts than movies about snakes elicit from viewers 
who are frightened by snakes.  
15. Which one of the following statements best exemplifies the posit ion of Radford 
concerning the nature of emotional response to art?  
(A) A person watching a movie about guerrilla warfare irrationally believes that 
he or she is present at the battle.  
(B) A person watching a play about a kidnapping feels nothing because he  or she 
rationally realizes it is not a real event.  
(C) A person gets particular enjoyment out of writing fictional narratives in which 
he or she figures as a main character.  
(D) A person irrationally bursts into tears while reading a novel about a 
destruc tive fire, even while realizing that he or she is reading about a 
fictional event.  
(E) A person who is afraid of snakes trips over  a branch and irrationally panics.  
Although bacteria are unicellular and among the simplest autonomous form s of life, they 
show a remarkable ability to sense their environment. They are attracted to materials they need 
and are repelled by harmful substances. Most types of bacteria swim very erratically: short 
smooth runs in relatively straight lines are followe d by brief tumbles, after which the bacteria 
shoot off  in random directions. This leaves researchers with the question of how such bacteria 
find their way to an attractant such as food or, in the case of photosynthetic bacteria, light, if 
their swimming pattern consists only of smooth runs and tumbles, the latter resulting in random 
changes in direction.  
One clue comes from the observation that when a chemical attractant is added to a 
suspension of such bacteria, the bacteria swim along a gradient of the attractant, from an area 
where the co ncentration of the attractant is weaker to an area where it is stronger. As they do 
so, their swimming is characterized by a decrease in tumbling and an increase in straight runs 
over relatively longer distances. As the bacteria encounter increasing concen trations of the 
attractant, their tendency to tumble is suppressed, whereas tumbling increases whenever they 
move away from the attractant. The net effect is that runs in the direction of higher  LSAT  719 
 concentrations of the attractant become longer and straighter  as a result of the suppression of 
tumbling, whereas runs away from it are shortened by an increased tendency of the bacteria to 
tumble and change direction.  
Biologists have proposed two mechanisms that bacteria might use in detecting changes in 
the concen tration of a chemical attractant. First, a bacterium might compare the concentration 
of a chemical at the front and back of its cell body simultaneously. If the concentration is higher 
at the front of the cell, then it knows it is moving up the concentrati on gradient, from an area 
where the concentration is lower to an area where it is higher. Alternatively, it might measure 
the concentration at one instant and again after a brief interval, in which case the bacterium 
must retain a memory of the initial con centration. Researchers reasoned that if bacteria do 
compare concentrations at different times, then when suddenly exposed to a uniformly high 
concentration of an attractant, the cells would behave as if they were swimming up a 
concentration gradient, with  long, smooth runs and relatively few tumbles. If, on the other hand, 
bacteria detect a chemical gradient by measuring it simultaneously at two distinct points, front 
and back, on the cell body, they would not respond to the jump in concentration because t he 
concentration of the attractant in front and back of the cells, though high, would be uniform. 
Experimental evidence suggests that bacteria compare concentrations at different times.  
16. It can be inferred from the passage that which one of the followin g experimental 
results would suggest that bacteria detect changes in the concentration of an 
attractant by measuring its concentration in front and back of the cell body 
simultaneously?  
(A) When suddenly transferred from a medium in which the concentration  of an 
attractant was uniformly low to one in which the concentration was 
uniformly high, the tendency of the bacteria to tumble and undergo random 
changes in direction increased.  
(B) When suddenly transferred from a medium in which the concentration of an  
attractant was uniformly low to one in which the concentration was 
uniformly high, the bacterias exhibited no change in the pattern of their 
motion.  
(C) When suddenly transferred from a medium in which the concentration of an 
attractant was uniformly low  to one in which the concentration was 
uniformly high, the bacterias movement was characterized by a complete 
absence of tumbling.  
(D) When p laced in a medium in which the concentration of an attractant was in 
some areas low and in others high, the bacter ia exhibited an increased 
tendency to tumble in those areas where the concentration of the attractant 
was high.  
(E) When suddenly transferred from a medium in which the concentration of an 
attractant was uniformly low to one that was completely free of attractants, 
the bacteria exhibited a tendency to suppress tumbling and move in longer, 
straighter lines.  
17. It can be inferred from the passage that a bacterium would increase the likelihood 720 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 of its moving away from an area where the concentration of a harmful substance 
is high if it did which one of the following?  
(A) Increased the speed at which it swam immediat ely after undergoing the 
random changes in direction that result from tumbling.  
(B) Detected the concentration gradient of an attractant toward which it could 
begin to swim.  
(C) Relied on the simultaneous measurement of the concentration of the 
substance i n front and back of its body, rather than on the comparison of the 
concentration at different points in time.  
(D) Exhibited a complete cessation of tumbling when it detected increases in the 
concentration of substance.  
(E) Exhibited an increased tendenc y to tumble as it encountered increasing 
concentrations of the substance, and suppressed tumbling as it detected 
decreases in the concentration of the substance.  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that when describing bacteria as swimming 
up a concen tration gradient (lines 49 -50), the author means that they were 
behaving as if they were swimming  
(A) Against a resistant medium that makes their swimming less efficient.  
(B) Away from a substance to which they are normally attracted.  
(C) Away from a subs tance that is normally harmful to them.  
(D) From an area where the concentration of a repellent is weaker to an area 
where it is completely absent.  
(E) From an area where the concentration of a substance is weaker to an area 
where it is stronger.  
19. The passage indicates that the pattern that characterizes a bacteriums motion  
changes  in response to  
(A) The kinds of chemical attractants present in different concentration gradients.  
(B) The mechanism that the bacterium adopts in determining the presence of an 
attractant.  
(C) The bacteriums detection of changes in the concentration of an attractant.  
(D) The extent to which neighboring bacteria are engaged in tumbling.  
(E) Changes in the intervals of time that occur between the bacteriums 
measurement of the concentration of an attractant.  
20. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the third paragraph 
of the passage?  
(A) Two approaches to a pro blem are discussed, a test that would determine 
which is more efficient is described, and a conclusion is made, based on 
experimental evidence.  
(B) Two hypotheses are described, a way of determining which of them is more  LSAT  721 
 likely to be true is discussed, and  one said to be more accurate on the basis 
of experimental evidence.  
(C) Two hypotheses are described, the flaws inherent in one of them are 
elaborated, and experimental evidence confirming the other is cited.  
(D) An assertion that a species has adopted tw o different mechanisms to solve a 
particular problem is made, and evidence is then provided in support of that 
assertion.  
(E) An assertion that one mechanism for solving a particular problem is more 
efficient than another is made, and evidence is then p rovided in support of 
that assertion.  
21. The passage provides information in support of which one of the following 
assertions?  
(A) The seemingly erratic motion exhibited by a microorganism can in fact reflect 
a mechanism by which it is able to control its  movement.  
(B) Biologists often overstate the complexity of simple organisms such as 
bacteria.  
(C) A bacterium cannot normally retain a memory of a measurement of the 
concentration of an attractant.  
(D) Bacteria now appear to have less control over their m ovement than biologists 
had previously hypothesized.  
(E) Photosynthetic bacteria appear to have more control over their movement 
than do bacteria that are not photosynthetic.  
Anthropologist David Mandelbaum makes a distinction between life -passage studi es and 
life-history studies which emerged primarily out of research concerning Native Americans. 
Life-passage studies, he says, emphasize the requirements of society, showing how groups 
socialize and enculturate  their young in order to make t hem into viable members of society. 
Life histories, however, emphasize the experiences and requirements of the individual, how 
the person copes with society rather than how society copes with the stream of individuals. 
Life-passage studies bring out the  general cultural characteristics and commonalities  that 
broadly define a culture, but are unconcerned with an individuals choices or how the individual 
perceives and responds to the demands and expectations imposed by the constraints of his or 
her culture. This distinction can clearly be seen in the autobiographies of Native American 
women.  
For example, some early recorded autobiographies, such as The Autobiography of a Fox 
Indian Woman , a life passag e recorded by anthropologist Truman Michelson, emphasizes 
prescribed roles. The narrator presents her story in a way that conforms with tribal expectations. 
Michelsons work is valuable as ethnography, as a reflection of the day -to-day responsibilities of 
Mesquak ie women, yet as is often the case with life -passage studies, it presents little of the 
central characters psychological motivation. The Fox womans life story focuses on her tribal 
education and integration into the ways of her people, and relates  only what Michelson 
ultimately decided was worth preserving. The difference between the two types of studies is 
often the result of the amount of control the narrator maintains over the material; 722 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 autobiographies in which there are no recorder -editors are far more reflective of the life -history 
category, for there are no outsiders shaping the story to reflect their preconceived notions of 
what the general cultural patterns are.  
For example, in Maria Campbells account of growing up as a Canadian Metis who was 
influenced strongly, and often negatively, by the non -Native American world around her, one 
learns a great deal about the life of Native American women, but Campbells individual story, 
which is told to us directly, is a lways the center of her narrative. Clearly it is important to her to 
communicate to the audience what her experiences as a Native American have been. Through 
Campbells story of her family the reader learns of the effect of poverty and prejudice on a 
peopl e. The reader becomes an intimate of Campbell the writer , sharing her pain and 
celebrating her small victories. Although Campbells book is written as a life history (the 
dramatic moments, the frustrations, and the fears are clearly hers), it reveals much about 
ethnic relations in Canada while reflecting the period in which it was written.  
22. Which one of the following is the most accurate expression of the main point of 
the passage?  
(A) The contributions of life -history studies to anthropology have made 
life-passage studies obsolete.  
(B) Despite their dissimilar approaches to the study of culture, life -history and 
life-passage studies have similar goals.  
(C) The autobiographies  of Native American women illustrate the differences 
between life -history and li fe-passage studies.  
(D) The roots of Maria Campbells autobiography can be traced to earlier 
narratives such as The Autobiography of a Fox Indian Woman . 
(E) Despite its shortcomings, the life -passage study is a more effective tool than 
the life -history study for identifying important cultural patterns.  
23. The term prescribed roles in line 24 of the passage refers to the  
(A) Function of life -passage studies in helping ethnologists to understand cultural 
tradition.  
(B) Function of life -history studies i n helping ethnologists to gather information.  
(C) Way in which a subject of a life passage views himself or herself.  
(D) Roles clearly distinguishing the narrator of an autobiography from the 
recorder of an autobiography.  
(E) Roles generally adopted by individuals in order to comply with cultural 
demands.  
24. The reference to the psychological motivation (line 30) of the subject of The 
Autobiography of a Fox Indian Woman  serves primarily to  
(A) Dismiss as irrelevant t he personal perspective in the life -history study.  
(B) Identify an aspect of experience that is not commonly a major focus of 
life-passage studies.  
(C) Clarify the narrators self -acknowledged purpose in relating a life passage.   LSAT  723 
 (D) Suggest a common confli ct between the goals of the narrator and those of the 
recorder in most life -passage studies.  
(E) Assert that developing an understanding of an individuals psychological 
motivation usually undermines objective ethnography.  
25. Which one of following statements about Maria Campbell can be inferred from 
material in the passage?  
(A) She was famil iar with the very early history of her tribe but lacked insight 
into the motivations of non -Native Americans.  
(B) She was unfamiliar with Michelsons work but had probably read a number of 
life-passage studies about Native Americans.  
(C) She had training a s a historian but was not qualified as an anthropologist.  
(D) Her family influenced her beliefs and opinions more than the events of her 
time did.  
(E) Her life history provides more than a record of her personal experience.  
26. According to the passage, one way in which life history studies differ from 
life-passage studies is that life -history studies are  
(A) Usually told in the subjects native language.  
(B) Less reliable because they rely solely on the subjects recall.  
(C) More likely to be told without the influence of an intermediary.  
(D) More creative in the way they interpret the subjects cultural legacy.  
(E) More representative of the historians point of view than of the 
ethnographers.  
27. Which one of the following pairings best illustrates the contrast between life 
passages and life histories?  
(A) A study of the attitudes of a society toward a mainstream religion and an 
analysis of techniques used to instruct members of that religious group.  
(B) A study of how a preindustrial society maintains peace with neighboring 
societies and a study of how a postindustrial society does the same.  
(C) A study of the way a military organization est ablishes and maintains 
discipline and a newly enlisted soldiers narrative describing his initial 
responses to the military environment.  
(D) An analysis of a societys means of subsistence and a study of how its 
members celebrate religious holidays.  
(E) A political history of a society focusing on leaders and parties and a study of 
how the electorate shaped the political landscape of the society.  
LSAT   05    SECTION III  
Time  35 minutes  28 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by  a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 724 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
Until recently many astronomers believed that asteroids travel about the solar system 
unaccompanied by satellites. These astronomers assumed  this because they considered 
asteroid -satellite systems inherently unstable. Theoreticians could have told them otherwise: 
even minuscule bodies in the solar system can theoretically have satellites, as long as 
everything is in proper scale. If a bowling ball were orbiting about the Sun in the asteroid belt, 
it could have a pebble orbiting it as far away as a few hundred radii (or about 50 meters) 
without losing the pebble to the Suns gravitational pull.  
Observations now suggest that asteroid satellites m ay exists not only in theory but also in 
reality. Several astronomers have noticed, while watching asteroids pass briefly in front of stars, 
that something besides the known asteroid sometimes blocks out  the star as well. Is that 
something a satellite?  
The most convincing such report concerns the asteroid Herculina, which was due to pass in 
front of a star in 1978. Astronomers waiting for the predicted event found not just one 
occultation, or eclipse , of the star, but two distinct drops in brightness. One was the predicted 
occultation, exactly on time. The other, lasting about five seconds, preceded the predicted 
event by about two minutes. The presence of a secondary body near Herculina thus seemed 
strongly indicated. To cause the secondary occultation, an unseen satellite would have to be 
about 45 kilometers in diameter, a quarter of the size of Herculina, and at a distance of 990 
kilometers from the asteroid at the time. These values are within theo retical bounds, and such 
an asteroid -satellite pair could be stable.  
With the Herculina event, apparent secondary occultations became respectable and 
more commonly reported. In fact, so common did reports of secondary events become that 
they are now simp ly too numerous for all of them to be accurate. Even if every asteroid has as 
many satellites as can be fitted around it without an undue number of collisions, only one in 
every hundred primary occultations would be accompanied by a secondary event (one in  every 
thousand if asteroid satellites system resembled those of the planets).  
Yet even astronomers who find the case for asteroid satellites unconvincing at present say 
they would change their minds if a photoelectric record were made of a well -behaved 
secondary event. By well -behaved they mean that during occultation the observed brightness 
must drop sharply as the star winks out  and must rise sharply as it reappears from behind the 
obstructing object, but the brightness during the secondary occultation must drop to that of the 
asteroid, no higher and no lower. This would make it extremely unlikely that an airplane or a 
glitch in the instruments was masquerading as an occulting body.  
1. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) The observation of Herculina represented the crucial event that astronomical 
observers and theoreticians had been waiting for to establish a convincing 
case for the stability of asteroid -satellite systems.  
(B) Although astronomers long believed that observation supports the existence 
of stable asteroid -satellite systems, numerous recent reports have increased  LSAT  725 
 skeptici sm on this issue in astronomy.  
(C) Theoreticians views on the stability of asteroid -satellite systems may be 
revised in the light of reports like those about Herculina.  
(D) Astronomers continue to consider it respectable to doubt the stability of 
asteroid -satellite systems, but new theoretical developments may change 
their views.  
(E) The Herculina event suggests that theoreticians views about asteroid -satellite 
systems may be correct, and astronomers agree about the kind of evidence 
needed to clearly resolve the issue.  
2. Which one of the following is mentioned in the passage as providing evidence 
that Herculina has a satellite?  
(A) the diameter of a body directly observed near Herculina  
(B) the distance between Herculina and planet nearest to it  
(C) the shortest possible time in which satellites of Herculina, if any, could 
complete a single orbit  
(D) the occultation that occurred shortly before the predicted occultation by 
Herculina  
(E) the precise extent to which observed brightness dropped during the 
occultation by Herculina  
3. According to the passage, the attitude of astronomers toward asteroid satellites 
since the Herculina event can best described as  
(A) open -mindedness comb ined with a concern for rigorous standards of proof  
(B) contempt for and impatience with the position held by theoreticians  
(C) bemusement at a chaotic mix of theory, inadequate or spurious data, and calls 
for scientific rigor  
(D) hardheaded skepticism, im plying rejection of all data not recorded 
automatically by state -of-the-art instruments  
(E) admiration for the methodical process by which science progresses from 
initial hypothesis to incontrovertible proof  
4. The author implies that which one of the following was true prior to reports of the 
Herculina event?  
(A) Since no good theoretica l model existed, all claims that reports of secondary 
occultations were common were disputed.  
(B) Some of the reported observations of secondary occultations were actually 
observations of collisions of satellites with one another.  
(C) If there were observa tions of phenomena exactly like the phenomena now 
labeled secondary occultations, astronomers were less likely than to have 
reported such observations.  
(D) The prevailing standards concerning what to classify as a well -behaved 726 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 secondary event were less str ingent than they are now.  
(E) Astronomers were eager to publish their observations of occultations of stars 
by satellites of asteroids.  
5. The information presented in the passage implies which one of the following 
about the frequency of reports of seco ndary occultations after the Herculina 
event? 
(A) The percentage of reports of primary occultations that also included reports of 
secondary occultations increased tenfold compared to the time before the 
Herculina event.  
(B) Primary occultations by asteroid s were reported to have been accompanied by 
secondary occultations in about one out of every thousand cases.  
(C) The absolute number of reports of secondary occultations increased tenfold 
compared to the time before the Herculina event.  
(D) Primary occulta tions by asteroids were reported to have been accompanied by 
secondary occultations in more than one out of every hundred cases.  
(E) In more than one out of every hundred cases, primary occultations were 
reported to have been accompanied by more than on e secondary occultation.  
6. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) cast doubts on existing reports of secondary occultations of stars  
(B) describe experimental efforts by astronomers to separate theoretically 
believable observations of satellites of asteroids from spurious ones  
(C) review the development of ideas among astronomers about whether or not 
satellites of asteroids exist  
(D) bring a theoreticians perspective to bear on an incomplete discussion of 
satellites of asteroids  
(E) illustrate the limits of reasonable speculation concerning the occultation of 
stars 
7. The passage suggests that which one of the following would most help to resolve 
the question of whether asteroids have satellites?  
(A) a review of pre -1978 repor ts of secondary occultations  
(B) an improved theoretical model of stable satellite systems  
(C) a photoelectric record of a well -behaved secondary occultation  
(D) a more stringent definition of what constitutes a well -behaved secondary 
occultation  
(E) a powerful telescope that would permit a comparison of ground -based 
observation with those made from airplanes  
Historians attempting to explain how scientific work was done in the laboratory of the 
seventeenth -century chemist and natural philosopher Robert B oyle must address a 
fundamental discrepancy between how such experimentation was actually performed and the  LSAT  727 
 seventeenth -century rhetoric describing it. Leaders of the new Royal Society of London in the 
1660s insisted that authentic science depended upon ac tual experiments performed, observed, 
and recorded by the scientists themselves. Rejecting the traditional contempt for manual 
operations, these scientists, all members of the English upper class, were not to think 
themselves demeaned by the mucking about with chemicals, furnaces, and pumps; rather, the 
willingness of each of them to become, as Boyle himself said, a mere drudge and 
under -builder in the search for Gods truth in nature was taken as a sign of their nobility and 
Christian piety.  
This rheto ric has been so effective that one modern historian assures us that Boyle himself 
actually performed all of the thousand or more experiments he reported. In fact, due to poor 
eyesight, fragile health, and frequent absences from his laboratory, Boyle turned  over much of 
the labor of obtaining and recording experimental results to paid technicians, although 
published accounts of the experiments rarely, if ever, acknowledged the technicians 
contributions. Nor was Boyle unique in relying on technicians without  publicly crediting their 
work.  
Why were the contributions of these technicians not recognized by their employers? One 
reason is the historical tendency, which has persisted into the twentieth century, to view 
scientific discovery as resulting from momenta ry flashes of individual insight rather than from 
extended periods of cooperative work by individuals with varying levels of knowledge and skill. 
Moreover, despite the clamor of seventeenth -century scientific rhetoric commending a 
hands -on approach, scienc e was still overwhelmingly an activity of the English upper class, and 
the traditional contempt that genteel society maintained for manual labor was pervasive and 
deeply rooted. Finally, all of Boyles technicians were servants, which in seventeenth -century 
usage meant anyone who worked for pay. To seventeenth -century sensibilities, the wage 
relationship was charged with political significance. Servants, meaning wage earners, were 
excluded from the franchise because they were perceived as ultimately depen dent on their 
wages and thus controlled by the will of their employers. Technicians remained invisible in the 
political economy of science for the same reasons that underlay servants general political 
exclusion. The technicians contribution, their observ ations and judgment,  if acknowledged, 
would not have been perceived in the larger scientific community as objective because the 
technicians were dependent on the wages paid to them by their employers. Servants might 
have made the apparatus work, but their contributions to the making of scientific knowledge 
were largely and conveniently ignored by their employers.  
8. Which one of the following best summarizes the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Seventeenth -century scientific experimentation would have been imp ossible 
without the work of paid laboratory technicians.  
(B) Seventeenth -century social conventions prohibited upper -class laboratory 
workers from taking public credit for their work.  
(C) Seventeenth -century views of scientific discovery combined with soci al class 
distinctions to ensure that laboratory technicians scientific work was never 
publicly acknowledged.  
(D) Seventeenth -century scientists were far more dependent on their laboratory 
technicians than are scientists today, yet far less willing to ackn owledge 728 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 technicians scientific contributions.  
(E) Seventeenth -century scientists liberated themselves from the stigma attached 
to manual labor by relying heavily on the work of laboratory technicians.  
9. It can be inferred from the passage that the seventeenth -century rhetoric 
mentioned in line 6 would have more accurately described the experimentation 
performed in Boyles laboratory if which one of the following were true?  
(A) Unlike many seventeenth -century scientists, Boyle recognized that most 
scientific discoveries resulted from the cooperat ive efforts of many 
individuals.  
(B) Unlike many seventeenth -century scientists, Boyle maintained a deeply 
rooted and pervasive contempt for manual labor.  
(C) Unlike many seventeenth -century scientists, Boyle was a member of the 
Royal Society of London.  
(D) Boyle generously acknowledged the contribution of the technicians who 
worked in his laboratory.  
(E) Boyle himself performed the actual labor of obtaining and recording 
experimental results.  
10. According to the author, servants of seventeenth -century England were excluded 
from the franchised because of the belief that  
(A) their interests were adequately represented by their employers  
(B) their education was inadequate to make informed political decisions  
(C) the independence of their political judgment  would be compromised by their 
economic dependence on their employers  
(D) their participation in the elections would be a polarizing influence on the 
political process  
(E) the manual labor that they performed did not constitute a contribution to the 
society that was sufficient to justify their participation in elections  
11. According to the author, the Royal Society of London insisted that scientists 
abandon the  
(A) belief that the primary purpose of scientific discovery was to reveal the divine 
truth that could be found in nature  
(B) view that scientific knowledge results largely from the insights of a few 
brilliant individuals rather than from the cooperative effort s of many workers  
(C) seventeenth -century belief that servants should be denied the right to vote 
because they were dependent on wages paid to them by their employers  
(D) traditional disdain for manual labor that was maintained by most members of 
the Engli sh upper class during the seventeenth -century  
(E) idea that the search for scientific truth was a sign of piety  
12. The author implies that which one of the following beliefs was held in both the  LSAT  729 
 seventeenth and the twentieth centuries?  
(A) Individual i nsights rather than cooperative endeavors produce most scientific 
discoveries.  
(B) How science is practiced is significantly influenced by the political beliefs 
and assumption of scientists.  
(C) Scientific research undertaken for pay cannot be considered o bjective.  
(D) Scientific discovery can reveal divine truth in nature.  
(E) Scientific discovery often relies on the unacknowledged contributions of 
laboratory technicians.  
13. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the last paragraph?  
(A) Several alternative answers are presented to a question posed  in the previous 
paragraph, and the last is adopted as the most plausible.  
(B) A question regarding the cause of the phenomenon described in the previous 
paragraph is posed, two possible explanations are rejected, and evidence is 
provided in support of a t hird. 
(C) A question regarding the phenomenon described in the previous paragraph is 
posed, and several incompatible views are presented.  
(D) A question regarding the cause of the phenomenon described in the previous 
paragraph is posed, and several contrib uting factors are then discussed.  
(E) Several answers to a question are evaluated in light of recent discoveries cited 
earlier in the passage.  
14. The authors discussion of the political significance of the wage relationship 
(line 48) serves to  
(A) p lace the failure of seventeenth -century scientists to acknowledge the 
contributions of their technicians in the large context of relations between 
workers and their employers in seventeenth -century England  
(B) provide evidence in support of the authors mo re general thesis regarding the 
relationship of scientific discovery to the economic conditions of societies in 
which it takes place  
(C) provide evidence in support of the authors explanation of why scientists in 
seventeenth -century England were reluctant  to rely on their technicians for 
the performance of anything but the most menial tasks  
(D) illustrate political and economic changes in the society of 
seventeenth -century England that had a profound impact on how scientific 
research was conduced  
(E) undermine the view that scientific discovery results from individual enterprise 
rather than from the collective endeavor of many workers  
15. It can be inferred from the passage that the clamor of seventeenth -century 
scientific rhetoric (lines 39 -40) refers  to 
(A) the claim that scientific discovery results largely from the insights of brilliant 730 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 individuals working alone  
(B) ridicule of scientists who were members of the English upper class and who 
were thought to demean themselves by engaging in the manual labor 
required by their experiments  
(C) criticism of scientists who publicly acknowledged the contributions of their 
technicians  
(D) assertions by members of the Royal Society of London that scientists 
themselves should be responsible for obtaining and rec ording experimental 
results  
(E) the claim by Boyle and his colleagues that the primary reason for scientific 
research is to discover evidence of divine truth in the natural world  
One type of violation of the antitrust laws is the abuse of monopoly power. Monopoly 
power is the abi lity of a firm to raise its prices above the competitive level that is, above the 
level that would exist naturally if several firms had to compete without driving away so many 
customers as to make the price increase unprofitable. In order to show that a fi rm has abused 
monopoly power, and thereby violated the antitrust laws, two essential facts must be 
established. First, a firm must be shown to possess monopoly power, and second, that power 
must have been used to exclude competition in the monopolized mark et or related markets.  
The price a firm may charge for its product is constrained by the availability of close 
substitutes for the product. If a firm attempts to charge a higher price a supracompetitive 
priceconsumers will turn to other firms able to supp ly substitute products at competitive 
prices. If a firm provides a large percentage of the products actually or potentially available, 
however, customers may find it difficult to buy from alternative suppliers. Consequently, a firm 
with a large share of th e relevant market of substitutable products may be able to raise its price 
without losing many customers. For this reason courts often use market share as a rough 
indicator of monopoly power.  
Supracompetitive prices are associated with a loss of consumers  welfare because such 
prices force some consumers to buy a less attractive mix of products than they would ordinarily 
buy. Supracompetitive prices, however, do not themselves constitute an abuse of monopoly 
power. Antitrust laws do not attempt to counter t he mere existence of monopoly power, or even 
the use of monopoly power to extract extraordinarily high profits. For example, a firm enjoying 
economies of scale that is, low unit production costs due to high volume does not violate the 
antitrust laws when i t obtains a large market share by charging prices that are profitable but so 
low that its smaller rivals cannot survive. If the antitrust laws posed disincentives to the 
existence and growth of such firms, the laws could impair consumers welfare. Even if the firm, 
upon acquiring monopoly power, chose to raise prices in order to increase profits, it would not 
be in violation of the antitrust laws.  
The antitrust prohibitions focus instead on abuses of monopoly power that exclude 
competition in the monopolize d market or involve leverage the use of power in one market to 
reduce competition in another. One such forbidden practice is a tying arrangement, in which a 
monopolist conditions the sale of a product in one market on the buyers purchase of another 
produc t in a different market. For example, a firm enjoying a monopoly in the communications 
systems market might not sell its products to a consumer unless that customer also buys its  LSAT  731 
 computer systems, which are competing with other firms computer systems.  
The focus on the abuse of monopoly power, rather than on monopoly itself, follows from 
the primary purpose of the antitrust laws: to promote consumers welfare through assurance of 
the quality and quantity of products available to consumers.  
16. Which one of the following distinctions between monopoly power and the abuse 
of monopoly power would the author say underlies the antitrust laws discussed in 
the passage?  
(A) Monopoly power is assessed in term of market share, whereas abuse of 
monopoly power is assesse d in term of market control.  
(B) Monopoly power is easy to demonstrate, whereas abuse of monopoly power 
is difficult to demonstrate.  
(C) Monopoly power involves only one market, whereas abuse of monopoly 
power involves at least two or more related markets.  
(D) Monopoly power is the ability to charge supracompetitive prices, whereas 
abuse of monopoly power is the use of that ability.  
(E) Monopoly power does not necessarily hurt consumer welfare, whereas abuse 
of monopoly power does.  
17. Would the use of l everage meet the criteria for abuse of monopoly power outlined 
in the first paragraph?  
(A) No, because leverage involves a nonmonopolized market.  
(B) No, unless the leverage involves a tying arrangement.  
(C) Yes, because leverage is a characteristic of mon opoly power.  
(D) Yes, unless the firm using leverage is charging competitive prices.  
(E) Yes, because leverage is used to eliminate competition in a related market.  
18. What is the main purpose of the third paragraph (lines 28 47)? 
(A) to distinguish between supracompetitive prices and supracompetitive profits  
(B) to describe the posit ive use of monopoly power  
(C) to introduce the concept of economies of scale  
(D) to distinguish what is not covered by the antitrust law under discussion from 
what is covered  
(E) to remind the reader of the issue of consumers welfare  
19. Given only the information in the passage, with which one of the following 
statements about competition would those responsible for the antitrust laws most 
likely agree?  
(A) Competition is essential to consumers welfare.  
(B) There are acceptable and unacceptable ways fo r firms to reduce their 
competition.  
(C) The preservation of competition is the principal aim of the antitrust laws.  732 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (D) Supracompetitive prices lead to reductions in competition.  
(E) Competition is necessary to ensure high -quality products at low prices.  
20. Which one of the following sentences would best complete the last paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) By limiting consumers choices, abuse of monopoly power reduces 
consumers w elfare, but monopoly alone can sometimes actually operate in 
the consumers best interest.  
(B) What is needed now is a set of related laws to deal with the negative impacts 
that monopoly itself has on consumers ability to purchase products at 
reasonable c ost. 
(C) Over time, the antitrust laws have been very effective in ensuring competition 
and, consequently, consumers welfare in the volatile communications and 
computer systems industries.  
(D) By controlling supracompetitive prices and corresponding supra competitive 
profits, the antitrust laws have, indeed, gone a long way toward meeting that 
objective.  
(E) As noted above, the necessary restraints on monopoly itself have been left to 
the market, where competitive prices and economies of scale are reward ed 
through increased market share.  
Amsden has divided Navajo weaving into four distinct styles. He argues that three of them 
can be identified by the type of design used to form horizontal bands: colored strips, zigzags, or 
diamonds. The fourth, or bordere d, style he identifies by a distinct border surrounding centrally 
placed, dominating figures.  
Amsden believes that the diamond style appeared after 1869 when, under Anglo influence 
and encouragement, the blanket became a rug with larger designs and bolder lines. The 
bordered style appeared about 1890, and, Amsden argues, it reflects the greatest number of 
Anglo influences on the newly emerging rug business. The Anglo desire that anything with a 
graphic designs have a top, bottom, and border is a cultural pr eference that the Navajo 
abhorred, as evidenced, he suggests, by the fact that in early bordered specimens strips of 
color unexpectedly break through the enclosing pattern.  
Amsden argues that the bordered rug represents a radical break with previous styles . He 
asserts that the border changed the artistic problem facing weavers: a blank area suggests the 
use of isolated figures, while traditional, banded Navajo designs were continuous and did not 
use isolated figures. The old patterns alternated horizontal d ecorative zones in a regular order.  
Amsdens view raises several questions. First, what is involved in altering artistic styles? 
Some studies suggest that artisans motor habits and thought processes must be revised when 
a style changes precipitously. In t he evolution of Navajo weaving, however, no radical revisions 
in the way articles are produced need be assumed. After all, all weaving subordinates design to 
the physical limitations created by the process of weaving, which includes creating an edge or 
border. The habits required to make decorative borders are, therefore, latent and easily brought 
to the surface.   LSAT  733 
 Second, is the relationship between the banded and bordered styles as simple as Amsden 
suggests? He assumes that a break in style is a break in ps ychology. But if style results from 
constant quests for invention, such stylistic breaks are inevitable. When a style has exhausted 
the possibilities inherent in its principles, artists cast about  for new, but not necessarily alien, 
principle s. Navajo weaving may have reached this turning point prior to 1890.  
Third, is there really a significant stylistic gap? Two other styles lie between the banded 
styles and the bordered styles. They suggest that disintegration of the bands may have altered 
visual and motor habits and prepared the way for a border filled with separate units. In the 
Chief White Antelope blanket, dated prior to 1865, ten years before the first Anglo trading post 
on the Navajo reservation, whole and partial diamonds interrupt th e flowing design and become 
separate forms. Parts of diamonds arranged vertically at each side may be seen to anticipate 
the border.  
21. The authors central thesis is that  
(A) the Navajo rejected the stylistic influences of Anglo culture  
(B) Navajo weavin g cannot be classified by Amsdens categories  
(C) the Navajo changed their style of weaving because they sought the challenge 
of new artistic problems  
(D) original motor habits and thought processes limit the extent to which a style 
can be revised  
(E) the casual factors leading to the emergence of the bordered style are not as 
clear -cut as Amsden suggests  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that Amsden views the use of strips of color 
(line 18) in the early bordered style as  
(A) a sign of resistance to a change in style  
(B) an echo of the diamond style  
(C) a feature derived from Anglo culture  
(D) an attempt to disintegrate the rigid form of the banded style  
(E) a means of differentiating the top of the weaving from the bottom  
23. The aut hors view of Navajo weaving suggests which one of the following?  
(A) The appearance of the first trading post on the Navajo reservation coincided 
with the appearance of the diamond style.  
(B) Traces of thought processes and motor habits of one culture can  generally be 
found in the art of another culture occupying the same period and region.  
(C) The bordered style may have developed gradually from the banded style as a 
result of Navajo experiencing with design.  
(D) The influence of Anglo culture was not the  only non -Native American 
influence on Navajo weaving.  
(E) Horizontal and vertical rows of diamond forms were transformed by the 
Navajos into solid lines to create the bordered style.  734 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 24. According to the passage, Navajo weavings made prior to 1890 typi cally were 
characterized by all of the following EXCEPT  
(A) repetition of forms  
(B) overall patterns  
(C) horizontal bands  
(D) isolated figures  
(E) use of color  
25. The author would most probably agree with which one of the following 
conclusions about th e stylistic development of Navajo weaving?  
(A) The styles of Navajo weaving changed in response to changes in Navajo 
motor habits and thought processes.  
(B) The zigzag style was the result of stylistic influences from Anglo culture.  
(C) Navajo weaving used  isolated figures in the beginning, but combined 
naturalistic and abstract designs in later styles.  
(D) Navajo weaving changed gradually from a style in which the entire surface 
was covered by horizontal bands to one in which central figures dominated 
the surface.  
(E) The styles of Navajo weaving always contained some type of isolated figure.  
26. The author suggests that Amsdens claim that borders in Navajo weaving were 
inspired by Anglo culture could be  
(A) conceived as a response to imagined correspon dences between Anglo and 
Navajo art  
(B) biased by Amsdens feelings about Anglo culture  
(C) a result of Amsdens failing to take into account certain aspects of Navajo 
weaving  
(D) based on a limited number of specimens of the styles of Navajo weaving  
(E) based on a confusion between the stylistic features of the zigzag and diamond 
styles  
27. The author most probably mentions the Chief White Antelope blanket in order to  
(A) establish the credit influence of Anglo culture on the bordered style  
(B) cast dou bts on the claim that the bordered style arose primarily from Anglo 
influence  
(C) cite an example of a blanket with a central design and no border  
(D) suggest that the Anglo influence produced significant changes in the two 
earliest styles of Navajo weavin g 
(E) illustrate how the Navajo had exhausted the stylistic possibilities of the 
diamond style  
28. The passage is primarily concerned with   LSAT  735 
 (A) comparing and contrasting different styles  
(B) questioning a view of how a style came into being  
(C) proposing  alternative methods of investigating the evolution of styles  
(D) discussing the influence of one culture on another  
(E) analyzing the effect of the interaction between two different cultures  
LSAT   06    SECTION I  
Time  35 minutes  27 Questions  
Direction s: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
The Taft -Hartley Act, passed by the United States Congress in 1947, gave states the power 
to enact right -to-work legislation that prohibits union shop  agreements. According to such an 
agreement, a labor union negotiates wages and working conditions for all workers in a business, 
and all workers are required to belong to the union. Sinc e 1947, 20 states have adopted 
right-to-work laws. Much of the literature concerning right -to-work laws implies that such 
legislation has not actually had a significant impact. This point of view, however, has not gone 
uncriticized. Thomas V Carroll has pr oposed that the conclusions drawn by previous researchers 
are attributable to their myopic focus on the premise that, unless right -to-work laws 
significantly reduce union membership within a state, they have no effect. Carroll argues that 
the right -to-work laws do matter in that such laws generate differences in real wages across 
states. Specifically, Carroll indicates that while right -to-work laws may not destroy unions by 
reducing the absolute number of unionized workers, they do impede the spread of unions and 
thereby reduce wages within right -to-work states. Because the countervailing power of unions 
is weakened in right -to-work states, manufacturers and their suppliers can act cohesively in 
competitive labor markers, thus lowering wages in the affec ted industries.  
Such a finding has important implications regarding the demographics of employment and 
wages in right -to-work states. Specifically, if right -to-work laws lower wages by weakening 
union power, minority workers can be expected to suffer a rel atively greater economic 
disadvantage in right -to-work states than in union shop states. This is so because, contrary to 
what was once thought, union tend to have a significant positive impact on the economic 
position of minority workers, especially Black workers, relative to White workers. Most studies 
concerned with the impact of unionism on the Black workers economic position relative to the 
White workers have concentrated on the changes in Black wages due to union membership. 
That is, they have concen trated on union versus  nonunion groups. In a pioneering study, 
however, Ashenfelter finds that these studies overlook an important fact: although craft 
unionism increase the differential between the wages of White workers and Black workers due 
to the tradi tional exclusion of minority workers from unions in the craft sectors of the labor 
market, strong positive wage gains are made by Black workers within industrial unions. In fact, 
Ashenfelter estimates that industrial unionism decreases the differential bet ween the wages of 
Black workers and White workers by about 3 percent. If state right -to-work laws weaken the 736 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 economic power of unions to raise wages, Black workers will experience a disproportionate 
decline in their relative wage positions. Black workers i n right -to-work states would therefore 
experience a decline in their relative economic positions unless there is strong economic growth 
in right -to-work states, creating labor shortages and thereby driving up wages.  
1. The reasoning behind the literature  (line 9), as that reasoning is presented in the 
passage, is most analogous to the reasoning behind which one of the following 
situations?  
(A) A law is proposed that benefits many but disadvantages a few: those 
advocating passage of the law argue that the disadvantages to few are not so 
serious that the benefits should be denied to many.  
(B) A new tax on certain categories of consumer items is proposed: those in favor 
of the tax argue that those affected by the tax are well able to pay it, since 
the items t axed are luxury items.  
(C) A college sets strict course requirements that every student must complete 
before graduating; students already enrolled argue that it is unfair for the 
new requirements to apply to those enrolled before the change.  
(D) The person nel office of a company designs a promotions become effective on 
January 1: the managers protest that such a policy means that they cannot 
respond fast enough to changes in staffing needs.  
(E) A fare increase in a public transportation system does not s ignificantly reduce 
the number of fares sold: the management of the public transportation 
system asserts, therefore, that the fare hike has had no negative effects.  
2. According to the passage, which one of the following is true of Carrolls study?  
(A) It implies that right -to-work laws have had a negligible effect on workers in 
right -to-work states.  
(B) It demonstrates that right -to-work laws have significantly decreased union 
membership from what it once was in right -to-work states.  
(C) It argues that rig ht-to-work laws have affected wages in right -to-work states.  
(D) It supports the findings of most earlier researchers.  
(E) It explains the mechanisms by which collusion between manufacturers and 
suppliers is accomplished.  
3. It can be inferred from the passage that the author believes which one of 
following about craft unions?  
(A) Craft unions have been successful in ensuring that the wages of their 
members remain higher than the wages of nonunion workers in the same 
occupational groups.  
(B) The number o f minority workers joining craft unions has increased sharply in 
states that have not adopted right -to-work legislation.  
(C) Wages for workers belonging to craft unions have generally risen faster and 
more steadily than wages for workers belonging to indus trial unions.   LSAT  737 
 (D) The wages of workers belonging to craft unions have not been significantly 
affected by right -to-work legislation, although the wages of workers 
belonging to industrial unions have been negatively affected.  
(E) The wages of workers belo nging to craft unions are more likely to be driven 
up in the event of labor shortages than are the wages of workers belonging to 
industrial unions.  
4. Which one of the following best describes the effect industrial unionism has had 
on the wages of Black wo rkers relative to those of White workers, as that effect is 
presented in the passage?  
(A) Prior to 1947, industrial unionism had little effect on the wages of Black 
workers relative to those of White workers: since 1947, it has had a slight 
positive effect . 
(B) Prior to 1947, industrial unionism had a strong positive effect on the wages of 
Black workers relative to those of White workers: since 1947, it has had 
little effect.  
(C) Prior to 1947, industrial unionism had a negative effect on the wages of Black  
workers relative to those of White workers: since 1947, it has had a 
significant positive effect.  
(D) Industrial unionism has contributed moderately to an increase in the wage 
differential between Black workers and White workers.  
(E) Industrial unionism has contributed strongly to a 3 percent decrease in the 
wage differential between Black workers and White workers.  
5. According to the passage, which one of the following could counteract the effects 
of a decrease in unions eco nomic power to raise wages in right -to-work states?  
(A) a decease in the number of union shop agreements  
(B) strong economic growth that cr eates labor shortages  
(C) a decrease in membership in craft unions  
(D) the merging of large industrial unions  
(E) a decline in the craft sectors of the labor market  
6. Which one of the following best describes the passage as a whole?  
(A) an overview of a problem in research methodology and a recommended 
solution to that problem  
(B) a comparison of two competing theori es and a suggestion for reconciling 
them  
(C) a critique of certain legislation and a proposal for modification of that 
legislation  
(D) a review of research that challenges the conclusions of earlier researchers  
(E) a presentation of a specific case that confirms the findings of an earlier study  
In the late nineteenth century, the need for women physicians in missionary hospitals in 738 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 Canton, China, led to expanded opportunities for both Western women and Chines e women. 
The presence of Western women as medical missionaries in China was made possible by certain 
changes within the Western missionary movement. Beginning in the 1870s, increasingly large 
numbers of women were forming womens foreign mission societies dedicated to the support of 
womens foreign mission work. Beyond giving the women who organized the societies a formal 
activity outside their home circles, these organizations enabled an increasing number of single 
women missionaries (as opposed to women w ho were part of the more typical husband -wife 
missionary teams) to work abroad. Before the formation of these womens organizations, 
mission funds had been collected by ministers and other church leaders, most of whom 
emphasized local parish work. What mon ey was spent on foreign missions was under the 
control of exclusively male foreign mission boards whose members were uniformly uneasy 
about the new idea of sending single women out into the mission field. But as womens groups 
began raising impressive amou nts of money donated specifically in support of single women 
missionaries, the home churches bowed  both to womens changing roles at home and to 
increasing numbers of single professional missionary women abroad.  
Although the idea of employing a woman physi cian was a daring one for most Western 
missionaries in China, the advantages of a well -trained Western woman physician could not be 
ignored by Canton mission hospital administrators. A woman physician could attend women 
patients without offending any of th e accepted conventions of female modesty. Eventually, 
some of these women were able to found and head separate womens medical institutions, 
thereby gaining access to professional responsibilities far beyond those available to them at 
home.  
These developme nts also led to the attainment of valuable training and status by a 
significant number of Chinese women. The presence of women physicians in Canton mission 
hospitals led many Chinese women to avail themselves of Western medicine who might 
otherwise have fa iled to do so because of their cultures emphasis on physical modesty. In order 
to provide enough women physicians for these patients, growing numbers of young Chinese 
women were given instruction in medicine. This enabled them to earn an independent incom e, 
something that was then largely unavailable to women within traditional Chinese society. Many 
women graduates were eventually able to go out on their own into  private practice, freeing 
themselves of dependence upon the mission community.  
The most import ant result of these opportunities was the establishment of clear evidence 
of womens abilities and strengths, clear reasons for affording women expanded opportunities, 
and clear role models for how these abilities and responsibilities might be exercised.  
7. Which one of the following statements about Western women missionaries 
working abroad can be inferred from the passage?  
(A) There were very few women involved in foreign missionary work before the 
1870s.  
(B) Most women working abroad as missionaries befo re the 1870s were financed 
by womens foreign mission societies.  
(C) Most women employed in mission hospitals abroad before the 1870s were 
trained as nurses rather than as physicians.   LSAT  739 
 (D) The majority of professional women missionaries working abroad befor e the 
1870s were located in Canton, China.  
(E) Most women missionaries working abroad before the 1870s were married to 
men who were also missionaries.  
8. The author mentions that most foreign mission boards were exclusively male 
most probably in order to  
(A) Contrast foreign mission boards with  the boards of secular organizations 
sending aid to China.  
(B) Explain the policy of foreign mission boards toward training Chinese women 
in medicine.  
(C) Justify the preference of foreign mission boards for professionally qualified 
missionaries.  
(D) Help account for the attitude of foreign mission boards towards sending 
single women missionaries abroad.  
(E) Differentiate foreign mission boards from boards directing parish work at 
home.  
9. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A situation is described, conditions that brought about the situation are 
explained, a nd results of the situation are enumerated.  
(B) An assertion is made, statements supporting and refuting the assertion are 
examined, and a conclusion is drawn.  
(C) An obstacle is identified, a variety of possible ways to overcome the obstacle 
are presented , and an opinion is ventured.  
(D) A predicament is outlined, factors leading up to the predicament are 
scrutinized, and a tentative resolution of the predicament is recommended.  
(E) A development is analyzed, the drawbacks and advantages accompanying the 
development are contrasted, and an eventual outcome is predicted.  
10. Which one of the following, if true, would most undermine the authors analysis 
of the reason for the inc reasing number of single women missionaries sent abroad 
beginning in the 1870s?  
(A) The Western church boards that sent the greatest number of single women 
missionaries abroad had not received any financial support from womens 
auxiliary groups.  
(B) The wo men who were sent abroad as missionary physicians had been raised 
in families with a strong history of missionary commitment.  
(C) Most of the single missionary women sent abroad were trained as teachers 
and translators rather than as medical practitioners.  
(D) The western church boards tended to send abroad single missionary women 
who had previously been active in local parish work.  
(E) None of the single missionary women who were sent abroad were active 740 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 members of foreign mission boards.  
11. According t o the passage, which one of the following was a factor in the 
acceptance of Western women as physicians in mission hospitals in Canton, 
China?  
(A) The number of male physicians practicing in that region.  
(B) The specific womens foreign mission society tha t supplied the funding.  
(C) The specific home parishes from which the missionary women came.  
(D) The cultural conventions of the host society.  
(E) The relations between the foreign mission boards and the hospital 
administrators.  
12. The passage suggests which one of the following about medical practices in 
late-nineteenth -century Canton, China?  
(A) There was great suspicion of non -Chinese med ical practices.  
(B) Medical care was more often administered in the home than in hospitals.  
(C) It was customary for women physicians to donate a portion of their income 
for the maintenance of their extended family.  
(D) It was not customary for female pati ents to be treated by male physicians.  
(E) Young women tended to be afforded as many educational opportunities in 
medicine as young men were.  
In recent years the early music movement, which advocates performing a work as it was 
performed at the time of its composition, has taken on the char acter of a crusade, particularly 
as it has moved beyond the sphere of medieval and baroque music and into music from the late 
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries by composers such as Mozart and Beethoven. 
Granted, knowledge about the experience of pl aying old music on now -obsolete instruments 
has been of inestimable value to scholars. Nevertheless, the early music approach to 
performance raises profound and troubling questions.  
Early music advocates assume that composers write only for the instruments  available to 
them, but evidence suggests that composers of Beethovens stature imagined extraordinarily 
high and low notes as part of their compositions, even when they recognized that such notes 
could not be played on instruments available at the time. I n the score of Beethovens first piano 
concerto, there is a wrong note, a high F -natural where the melody obviously calls for a high 
F-sharp, but pianos did not have this high an F -sharp when Beethoven composed the concerto. 
Because Beethoven once expres sed a desire to revise his early works to exploit the extended 
range of pianos that became available to him some years later, it seems likely that he would 
have played the F -sharp if given the opportunity. To use a piano exactly contemporary with the 
works composition would require playing a note that was probably frustrating for Beethoven 
himself to have had to play . 
In addition, early music advocates often inadvertently divorce  music and  its performance 
from the life of which they were, and are, a part. The discovery that Haydns and Mozarts 
symphonies were conducted during their lifetimes by a pianist who played the chords to keep 
the orchestra together has given rise to early music recordings in which a piano can be heard  LSAT  741 
 obtrusively in the foreground,  despite evidence indicating that the orchestral piano was virtually 
inaudible to audiences at eighteenth -century concerts and was dropped as musically 
unnecessary when a better way to beat time was found. And although in the early nineteenth 
century the f irst three movements (sections) of Mozarts and Beethovens symphonies were 
often played faster, and the last movement slower than today, this difference can readily be 
explained by the fact that at that time audiences applauded at the end of each movement , 
rather than withholding applause until the end of the entire work. As a result, musicians were 
not forced into extra brilliance in the finale in order to generate applause, as they are now. To 
restore the original tempo of these symphonies represents an irrational denial of the fact that 
our concepts of musical intensity and excitement have quite simply, changed.  
13. It can be inferred from the passage that by a piano exactly contemporary (line 
30) with the composition of Beethovens first piano concert o, the author means 
the kind of piano that was  
(A) Designed to be inaudible to the audience when used by conductors of 
orchestras.  
(B) Incapable of playing the high F -natural that is in the score of Beethovens 
original version of the concerto.  
(C) Unavail able to Mozart and Haydn.  
(D) Incapable of playing the high F -sharp that the melody of the concerto calls 
for. 
(E) Influential in Beethovens decision to revise his early compositions.  
14. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the p assage? 
(A) The early music movement has yet to resolve a number of troubling questions 
regarding its approach to the performance of music.  
(B) The early music movement, while largely successful in its approach to the 
performance of medieval and baroque mu sic, has yet to justify its use of 
obsolete instruments in the performance of music by Beethoven and Mozart.  
(C) The early music approach to performance often assumes that composers write 
music that is perfectly tailored to the limitations of the instrumen ts on which 
it will be performed during their lifetimes.  
(D) Although advocates of early music know much about the instruments used to 
perform music at the time it was composed, they lack information regarding 
how the style of such performances has changed  since such music was 
written.  
(E) The early music movement has not yet fully exploited the knowledge that it 
has gained from playing music on instruments available at the time such 
music was composed.  
15. In the second paragraph, the author discusses Beethovens first piano concert o 
primarily in order to  
(A) Illustrate how piano music began to change in response to the extended range 
of pianos that became available during Beethovens lifetime.  742 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (B) Illustrate how Beethovens work failed to anticipate the changes in the design 
of inst ruments that were about to be made during his lifetime.  
(C) Suggest that early music advocates commonly perform music using scores 
that do not reflect revisions made to the music years after it was originally 
composed.  
(D) Illustrate how composers like Bee thoven sometimes composed music that 
called for notes that could not be played on instruments that were currently 
available.  
(E) Provide an example of a piano composition that is especially amenable to 
being played on piano available at the time the mus ic was composed.  
16. The author suggests that the final movements of symphonies by Mozart and 
Beethoven might be played more slowly by todays orchestras if which one of the 
following were to occur?  
(A) Orchestras were to use instruments no more advanced i n design than those 
used by orchestras at the time Mozart and Beethoven composed their 
symphonies.  
(B) Audiences were to return to the custom of applauding at the end of each 
movement of a symphony.  
(C) Audiences were to reserve their most enthusiastic app lause for the most 
brilliantly played finales.  
(D) Conductors were to return to the practice of playing the chords on an 
orchestral piano to keep the orchestra together.  
(E) Conductors were to conduct the symphonies in the manner in which 
Beethoven and Mozart had conducted them.  
17. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the last paragraph?  
(A) A generalization is made evidence undermining it is presented, and a 
conclusion rejecting it is then drawn.  
(B) A criticism is stated and t hen elaborated with two supporting examples.  
(C) An assumption is identified and then evidence undermining its validity is 
presented.  
(D) An assumption is identified and then evidence frequently provided in support 
of it is then critically evaluated.  
(E) Two specific cases are presented and then a conclusion regarding their 
significance is drawn.  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that the authors explanation in lines 50 -54 
would be most weakened if which one of the following were true?  
(A) M usicians who perform in modern orchestras generally receive more 
extensive training than did their nineteenth -century counterparts.  
(B) Breaks between the movements of symphonies performed during the early 
nineteenth century often lasted longer than they d o today because  LSAT  743 
 nineteenth -century musicians needed to retune their instruments between 
each movement.  
(C) Early nineteenth -century orchestral musicians were generally as concerned 
with the audiences response to their music as are the musicians who 
perfor m today in modern orchestras.  
(D) Early nineteenth -century audience applauded only perfunctorily after the first 
three movements of symphonies and conventionally withheld their most 
enthusiastic applause until the final movement was completed.  
(E) Early  nineteenth -century audiences were generally more knowledgeable about 
music than are their modern counterparts.  
19. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to agree 
with which one of the following assertions regarding the e arly music recordings 
mentioned in the third paragraph?  
(A) These recordings fail to recognize that the last movements of Haydns and 
Mozarts symphonies were often played slower in the eighteenth century 
than they are played today.  
(B) These recordings be tray the influence of baroque musical style on those early 
music advocates who have recently turned their attention to the music of 
Haydn and Mozart.  
(C) By making audible the sound of an orchestral piano that was inaudible in 
eighteenth century performanc es, these recordings attempt to achieve 
aesthetic integrity at the expense of historical authenticity.  
(D) By making audible the sound of an orchestral piano that was inaudible in 
eighteenth century performances, these recordings unwittingly create music 
that is unlike what eighteenth century audiences heard.  
(E) These recordings suggest that at least some advocates of early music 
recognize that concepts of musical intensity and excitement have changed 
since Haydn and Mozart composed their symphonies.  
20. The author suggests that the modern audiences tendency to withhold applause 
until the end of a symphonys performance is primarily related to which one of 
the following?  
(A) The replacement of the orchestral piano as a method of keeping the orchestra 
together.  
(B) A gradual increase since the time of Mozart and Beethoven in audiences 
expectations regarding the ability of orchestral musicians.  
(C) A change since the early nineteenth century in audiences concepts of musical 
excitement and intensity.  
(D) A more sophisticated appreciation of the structural integrity of the symphony 
as a piece of music.  
(E) The tendency of orchestral musicians to employ their most brilliant effects in 
the early.  744 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 Although the United States steel industry faces widely publi cized economic problems that 
have eroded its steel production capacity, not all branches of the industry have been equally 
affected. The steel industry is not monolithic: it includes integrated producers, minimills, and 
specialty -steel mills. The integrate d producers start with iron ore and coal and produce a wide 
assortment of shaped steels. The minimills reprocess scrap steel into a limited range of 
low-quality products, such as reinforcing rods for concrete. The specialty -steel mills are similar 
to minim ills in that they tend to be smaller than the integrated producers and are based on 
scrap, but they manufacture much more expensive products than minimills do and commonly 
have an active in-house  research -and-development effort.  
Both mi nimills and specialty -steel mills have succeeded in avoiding the worst of the 
economic difficulties that are afflicting integrated steel producers, and some of the mills are 
quite profitable. Both take advantage of new technology for refining and casting s teel, such as 
continuous casting, as soon as it becomes available. The minimills concentrate on producing a 
narrow range of products for sale in their immediate geographic area, whereas specialty -steel 
mills preserve flexibility in their operations in orde r to fulfill a customers particular 
specifications.  
Among the factors that constrain the competitiveness of integrated producers are 
excessive labor , energy, and capital costs, as well as manufacturing inflexibility. Their 
equipment is old and less automa ted, and does not incorporate many of the latest refinement in 
steelmaking technology. (For example, only about half of the United States integrated 
producers have continuous casters, which combine pouring and rolling into one operation and 
thus save the c ost of separate rolling equipment.) One might conclude that the older 
labor-intensive machinery still operating in United States integrated plants is at fault for the 
poor performance of the United States industry, but this cannot explain why Japanese 
integrated producers, who produce a higher -quality product using less energy and labor, are 
also experiencing economic trouble. The fact is that the common  technological denominator  of 
integrated producers is an inherently inefficient process that is still roo ted in the nineteenth 
century.  
Integrated producers have been unable to compete successfully with minimills because the 
minimills, like specialty -steel mills, have dispensed almost entirely with the archaic energy and 
capital -intensive front end of integra ted steelmaking: the iron -smelting process, including the 
mining and preparation of the raw materials and the blast -furnace operation. In addition, 
minimills have found a profitable way to market steel products: as indicated above, they sell 
their finished  products locally, thereby reducing transportation costs, and concentrate on a 
limited range of shapes and sizes within a narrow group of products that can be manufactured 
economically. For these reasons, minimills have been able to avoid the economic decl ine 
affecting integrated steel producers.  
21. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) United States steel producers face economic problems that are shared by 
producers in other nations.  
(B) Minimills are the most success ful steel producers because they best meet 
market demands for cheap steel.   LSAT  745 
 (C) Minimills and specialty -steel mills are more economically competitive than 
integrated producers because they use new technology and avoid the costs of 
the iron -smelting process.  
(D) United States steel producers are experiencing an economic decline that can 
be traced back to the nineteenth century.  
(E) New steelmaking technologies such as continuous casting will replace 
blast -furnace operations to reverse the decline in United States steel 
production.  
22. The author mentions all of the following as features of minimills EXCEPT  
(A) flexibility in their operations  
(B) local sale of their products  
(C) avoidance of mining operations  
(D) use of new steel -refining technology  
(E) a limited range of low -quality products  
23. The author of the passage refers to Japanese integrated producers (line 43) 
primarily in order to support the view that  
(A) different economic difficulties face the steel industries of different nations  
(B) not all integrated producers share a common technological denominator  
(C) labor-intensive machinery cannot be blamed for the e conomic condition of 
United States integrated steel producers  
(D) modern steelmaking technology is generally labor -and energy -efficient  
(E) labor-intensive machinery is an economic burden on United States integrated 
steel producers  
24. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the third 
paragraph?  
(A) A hypothesis is proposed and supported ; then an opposing view is presented 
and criticized.  
(B) A debate is described and illustrated: then a contrast is made and the debate is 
resolved.  
(C) A dilemma is described and cited as evidence for a broader criticism.  
(D) A proposition is stated and argued, then rejected in favo r of a more general 
statement, which is supported with additional evidence.  
(E) General statements are made and details given ; then an explanation is 
proposed and rejected, and an alternative is offered.  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that United States specialty -steel mills 
generally differ from integrated steel prod ucers in that the specialty -steel mills  
(A) sell products in a restricted geographical area  
(B) share the economic troubles of the minimills  746 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (C) resemble specialty -steel mills found in Japan  
(D) concentrate on producing a narrow range of products  
(E) do not operate blast furnaces  
26. Each of the following describes an industry facing a problem also experienced by 
United Stated integrated steel producers EXCEPT  
(A) a paper -manufacturing company that experiences difficulty in obtaining 
enough timber and ot her raw materials to meet its orders  
(B) a food-canning plant whose canning machines must constantly be tended by 
human operators  
(C) a textile firm that spends heavily on capital equipment and energy to process 
raw cotton before it is turned into fabric  
(D) a window -glass manufacturer that is unable to produce quickly different 
varieties of glass with special features required by certain customers  
(E) a leather -goods company whose hand -operated cutting and stitching machines 
were manufactured in Italy i n the 1920s  
27. Which one of the following, if true, would best serve as supporting evidence for 
the authors explanation of the economic condition of integrated steel producers?  
(A) Those nations that derive a larger percentage of their annual steel produ ction 
from minimills than the United States does also have a smaller per capita 
trade deficit.  
(B) Many integrated steel producers are as adept as the specialty -steel mills at 
producing high -quality products to meet customer specifications.  
(C) Integrated steel producers in the United States are rapidly adopting the 
production methods of Japanese integrated producers.  
(D) Integrated steel producers in the United States are now attempting to develop 
a worldwide market by advertising heavily.  
(E) Those nat ions in which iron -smelting operations are carried out independently 
of steel production must heavily subsidize those operations in order to make 
them profitable.  
LSAT   07    SECTION III  
Time  35 minutes  27 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this sectio n is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that i s, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
The labor force is often organized as if workers had no family responsibilities. 
Preschool -age children need full -time care ; children in primary school need care after school 
and during school vacations. Although day -care services can resolve some scheduling conflicts 
between home and office, workers cannot always find or afford suitable care. Even when they  LSAT  747 
 obtain such care, p arents must still cope with emergencies, such as illnesses, that keep children 
at home. Moreover, children need more than tending; they also need meaningful time with their 
parents. Conventional full -time workdays, especially when combined with unavoidable  
household duties, are too inflexible for parents with primary child -care responsibility.  
Although a small but increasing number of working men are single parents, those barriers 
against successful participation in the labor market that are related to prim ary child -care 
responsibilities mainly disadvantage women. Even in families where both parents work, cultural 
pressures are traditionally much greater on mothers than on fathers to bear the primary 
child-rearing responsibilities.  
In reconciling child -rearing responsibilities with participation in the labor market, many 
working mothers are forced to make compromises. For example, approximately one -third of all 
working mothers are employed only part -time, even though part -time jobs are dramatically 
underpaid and often less desirable in comparison to full -time employment. Even though 
part-time work is usually available only in occupations offering minimal employee responsibility 
and little opportunity for advancement or self -enrichment, such employment does all ow many 
women the time and flexibility to fulfill their family duties, but only at the expense of the 
advantages associated with full -time employment.  
Moreover, even mothers with full -time employment must compromise opportunities in 
order to adjust to barr iers against parents in the labor market. Many choose jobs entailing little 
challenge or responsibility or those offering flexible scheduling, often available only in poorly 
paid positions, while other working mothers, although willing and able to assume a s much 
responsibility as people without children, find that their need to spend regular and predictable 
time with their children inevitably causes them to lose career opportunities to those without 
such demands. Thus, women in education are more likely to become teachers than school 
administrators, whose more conventional full -time work schedules do not correspond to the 
schedules of school -age children, while female lawyers are more likely to practice law in trusts 
and estates, where they can control their  work schedules, than in litigation, where they cannot. 
Nonprofessional women are concentrated in secretarial work and department store  sales, 
where their absences can be covered easily by substitutes and where they can enter and leave 
the work force with little loss, since the jobs offer so little personal gain. Indeed, as long as the 
labor market remains hostile to parents, and  family roles continue to be allocated on the basis 
of gender, women will be seriously disadvantaged in that labor market.  
1. Which one of the following best summarizes the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Current trends in the labor force indicate that worki ng parents, especially 
women, may not always need to choose between occupational and child -care 
responsibilities.  
(B) In order for mothers to have an equal opportunity for advancement in the 
labor force, traditional family roles have to be reexamined and r evised.  
(C) Although single parents who work have to balance parental and career 
demands, single mothers suffer resulting employment disadvantages that 
single fathers can almost always avoid.  
(D) Although child -care responsibilities disadvantage many women  in the labor 748 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 force, professional women (such as teachers and lawyers) are better able to 
overcome this problem than are nonprofessional women.  
(E) Traditional work schedules are too inflexible to accommodate the child -care 
responsibilities of many parents, a fact that severely disadvantages women in 
the labor force.  
2. Which one of the following statements about part -time work can be inferred  from 
the information presented in the passage?  
(A) One -third of all part -time workers are working mothers.  
(B) Part -time work generally offers fewer opportunities for advancement to 
working mothers than to women generally.  
(C) Part -time work, in addition to having relatively poor wages, often requires 
that employees work during holidays, when their children are out of school.  
(D) Part -time employment, despite its disadvantages, provides working mothers 
with an opportunity to address some of the demands of caring for children.  
(E) Many mothers with primary child -care responsibility choose part -time jobs in 
order to better exploit full -time career opportunities after their children are 
grown.  
3. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to agree 
with which one of the following statements about working fathers in two -parent 
families?  
(A) They are equally burdened by the employment disadvantages placed upon all 
parents male and female in the labor market.  
(B) They are so absorbe d in their jobs that they often do not see the injustice 
going on around them.  
(C) They are shielded by the traditional allocation of family roles from many of 
the pressures associated with child -rearing responsibilities.  
(D) They help compound the inequit ies in the labor market by keeping women 
form competing with men for career opportunities.  
(E) They are responsible for many of the problems of working mothers because 
of their insistence on traditional roles in the family.  
4. Of the following, which on e would the author most likely say is the most 
troublesome barrier facing working parents with primary child -care 
responsibility?  
(A) the lack of full -time jobs open to women  
(B) the inflexibility of work schedules  
(C) the low wages of part -time employment  
(D) the limited advancement opportunities for nonprofessional employees  
(E) the practice of allocating responsibilities in the workplace on the basis of 
gender   LSAT  749 
 5. The passage suggests that day care is at best a limited solution to the pressures 
associated with child rearing for all of the following reasons EXCEPT:  
(A) Even  the best day care available cannot guarantee that children will have 
meaningful time with their parents.  
(B) Some parents cannot afford day -care services . 
(C) Working parents sometimes have difficulty finding suitable day care for their 
children.  
(D) Pare nts who send their children to day care still need to provide care for their 
children during vacations.  
(E) Even children who are in day care may have to stay home when they are sick.  
6. According to the passage, many working parents may be forced to make any of 
the following types of career decisions EXCEPT  
(A) declining professional positions for nonpr ofessional ones, which typically 
have less conventional work schedules  
(B) accepting part -time employment rather than full -time employment  
(C) taking jobs with limited responsibility, and thus more limited career 
opportunities, in order to have a more flex ible schedule  
(D) pursuing career specializations that allow them to control their work 
schedules instead of pursuing a more desirable specialization in the same 
field 
(E) limiting the career potential of one parent, often the mother, who assumes 
greater child -care responsibility  
7. Which one of the following statements would most appropriately continue the 
discussion at the end of the passage?  
(A) At the same time, most men will remain better able to enjoy the career and 
salary opportunities offered by the labor market.  
(B) Of course, men who are married to working mothers know of these 
employment barriers but seem unwilling to do anything about them.  
(C) On the othe r hand, salary levels may become more equitable between men 
and women even if the other career opportunities remain more accessible to 
men than to women.  
(D) On the contrary, men with primary child -rearing responsibilities will continue 
to enjoy more advan tages in the workplace than their female counterparts.  
(E) Thus, institutions in society that favor men over women will continue to 
widen the gap between the career opportunities available for men and for 
women.  
Critics have long been puzzled by the inn er contradictions of major characters in John 
Websters tragedies. In his The Duchess of Malfi , for instance, the Duchess is good in 
demonstrating the obvious tenderness and sincerity of her love for Antonio, but bad in 
ignoring the wishes and welfare of her family and in making religion a cloak hiding worldly 750 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 self-indulgence. Bosola is bad in serving Ferdinand, good in turning the Duchess  thoughts 
toward heaven and in planning to avenge her murder. The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle 
implied  that such contradictions are virtually essential to the tragic personality, and yet critics 
keep coming back to this element of inconsistency as though it were an eccentric feature of 
Websters own tragic vision.  
The problem is that, as an Elizabethan pla ywright, Webster has become a prisoner of our 
critical presuppositions. We have, in recent years, been dazzled by the way the earlier 
Renaissance and medieval theater, particularly the morality play, illuminates Elizabethan drama. 
We now understand how the  habit of mind that saw the world as a battleground between good 
and evil produced the morality play. Morality plays allegorized that conflict by presenting 
characters whose actions were defined as the embodiment of good or evil. This model of reality 
lived on, overlaid by different conventions, in the most sophisticated Elizabethan works of the 
following age. Yet Webster seems not to have been as heavily influenced by the morality plays 
model of reality as were his Elizabethan contemporaries; he was apparently more sensitive to 
the more morally complicated Italian drama than to these English sources. Consequently, his 
characters cannot be evaluated according to reductive formulas of good and evil, which is 
precisely what modern critics have tried to d o. They choose what seem to be the most 
promising of the contradictor values that are dramatized in the play, and treat those values as if 
they were the only basis for analyzing the moral development of the plays major characters, 
attributing the inconsis tencies in a characters behavior to artistic incompetence on Websters 
part. The lack of consistency in Websters characters can be better understood if we recognize 
that the ambiguity at the heart of his tragic vision lies not in the external world but i n the duality 
of human nature. Webster establishes tension in his plays by setting up conflicting systems of 
value that appear immoral only when one value system is viewed exclusively from the 
perspective of the other. He presents us not only with characte rs that we condemn intellectually 
or ethically and at the same time impulsively approve of, but also with judgments we must 
accept as logically sound and yet find emotionally repulsive. The dilemma is not only dramatic: 
it is tragic, because the conflict i s irreconcilable, and because it is ours as much as that of the 
characters.  
8. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) clarify an ambiguous assertion  
(B) provide evidence in support of a commonly held view  
(C) analyze an unresolved question and propos e an answer  
(D) offer an alternative to a flawed interpretation  
(E) describe and categorize opposing viewpoints  
9. The author suggests which one of the following about the dramatic works that 
most influenced Webster s tragedies?  
(A) They were not concer ned with dramatizing the conflict between good and evil 
that was presented in morality plays.  
(B) They were not as sophisticated as the Italian sources from which other 
Elizabethan tragedies were derived.   LSAT  751 
 (C) They have never been adequately understood by c ritics.  
(D) They have only recently been used to illuminate the conventions of 
Elizabethan drama.  
(E) They have been considered by many critics to be the reason for Webster s 
apparent artistic incompetence.  
10. The authors allusion to Aristotles view of tragedy in lines 11 -13 serves which 
one of the following functions in the passage?  
(A) It intr oduces a commonly held view of Websters tragedies that the author 
plans to defend.  
(B) It supports the authors suggestion that Websters conception of tragedy is not 
idiosyncratic.  
(C) It provides an example of an approach to Websters tragedies that the  author 
criticizes.  
(D) It establishes the similarity between classical and modern approaches to 
tragedy.  
(E) It supports the authors assertion that Elizabethan tragedy cannot be fully 
understood without the help of recent scholarship.  
11. It can be inferred from the passage that modern critics interpretations of 
Webster s tragedies would be more valid i f 
(A) the ambiguity inherent in Websters tragic vision resulted from the duality of 
human nature  
(B) Websters conception of the tragic personality were similar to that of Aristotle  
(C) Webster had been heavily influenced by the morality play  
(D) Elizabet han dramatists had been more sensitive to Italian sources of influence  
(E) the inner conflicts exhibited by Websters characters were similar to those of 
modern audiences  
12. With which one of the following statements regarding Elizabethan drama would 
the author be most likely to agree?  
(A) The skill of Elizabethan dramat ists has in recent years been overestimated.  
(B) The conventions that shaped Elizabethan drama are best exemplified by 
Websters drama.  
(C) Elizabethan drama, for the most part, can be viewed as being heavily 
influenced by the morality play.  
(D) Only by ca refully examining the work of his Elizabethan contemporaries can 
Websters achievement as a dramatist be accurately measured.  
(E) Elizabethan drama can best be described as influenced by a composite of 
Italian and classical sources.  
13. It can be inferred from the passage that most modern critics assume which one of 
the following in their interpretation of Websters tragedies ? 752 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (A) Websters play tended to allegorize the conflict between good and evil more 
than did those of his contemporaries.  
(B) Websters plays were derived more from Italian than from English sources.  
(C) The artistic flaws in Websters tragedies were largely  the result of his 
ignorance of the classical definition of tragedy.  
(D) Websters tragedies provide no relevant basis for analyzing the moral 
development of their characters.  
(E) In writing his tragedies, Webster was influenced by the same sources as his 
contemporaries.  
14. The author implies that Websters conception of tragedy was  
(A) artistically flawed  
(B) highly conventional  
(C) largely derived from the morality play  
(D) somewhat different from the conventional Elizabethan conception of tragedy  
(E) uninfluenced by the classical conception of tragedy  
Cultivation of a single crop on a given tract of land leads eventually to decreased yields. 
One reason for this is that  harmful bacterial phytopathogens, organisms parasitic on plant hosts, 
increase in the soil surrounding plant roots. The problem can be cured by crop rotation, denying 
the pathogens a suitable host for a period of time. However, even if crops are not rotat ed, the 
severity of diseases brought on by such phytopathogens often decreases after a number of 
years as the microbial population of the soil changes and the soil becomes suppressive to 
those diseases. While there may be many reasons for this phenomenon , it is clear that levels of 
certain bacteria, such as Pseudomonas fluorescens , a bacterium antagonistic to a number of 
harmful phytopathogens, are greater in suppressive than in nonsuppressive soil. This suggests 
that the presence of such bacteria suppres ses phytopathogens. There is now considerable 
experimental support for this view. Wheat yield increases of 27 percent have been obtained in 
field trials by treatment of wheat seeds with fluorescent pseudomonads. Similar treatment of 
sugar beets, cotton, an d potatoes has had similar results.  
These improvements in crop yields through the application of Pseudomonas fluorescens  
suggest that agriculture could benefit from the use of bacteria genetically altered for specific 
purposes. For example, a form of phyto pathogen altered to remove its harmful properties could 
be released into the environment in quantities favorable to its competing with and eventually 
excluding the harmful normal strain. Some experiments suggest that deliberately releasing 
altered nonpatho genic Pseudomonas syringae  could crowd out  the nonaltered variety that 
causes frost damage. Opponents of such research have objected that the deliberate and 
large-scale release of genetically altered bacteria might have deleterious results. Proponents, 
on the other hand, argue that this particular strain is altered only by the removal of the gene 
responsible for the strain s propensity to cause frost damage, thereby rendering it safer than 
the phytopathogen from which it was derived.  
Some proponents have gone further and suggest that genetic alteration techniques could 
create organisms with totally new combinations of desirable traits not found in nature. For  LSAT  753 
 example, genes responsible for production of insecticidal compounds have bee n transposed 
from other bacteria into pseudomonads that colonize corn roots. Experiments of this kind are 
difficult and require great care: such bacteria are developed in highly artificial environments 
and may not compete well with natural soil bacteria. N evertheless, proponents contend that the 
prospects for improved agriculture through such methods seem excellent. These prospects lead 
many to hope that current efforts to assess the risks of deliberate release of altered 
microorganisms will successfully an swer the concerns of opponents and create a climate in 
which such research can go forward without undue impediment.  
15. Which one of the following best summarizes the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Recent field experiments with genetically altered Pseudomon as bacteria have 
shown that releasing genetically altered bacteria into the environment would 
not involve any significant danger.  
(B) Encouraged by current research, advocates of agricultural use of genetically 
altered bacteria are optimistic that such use  will eventually result in 
improved agriculture, though opponents remain wary.  
(C) Current research indicates that adding genetically altered Pseudomonas 
syringae  bacteria to the soil surrounding crop plant roots will have many 
beneficial effects, such as the prevention of frost damage in certain crops.  
(D) Genetic alteration of a number of harmful phytopathogens has been 
advocated by many researchers who contend that these techniques will 
eventually replace such outdated methods as crop rotation.  
(E) Genetic alteration of bacteria has been successful in highly artificial 
laboratory conditions, but opponents of such research have argued that these 
techniques are unlikely to produce organisms that are able to survive in 
natural environments.  
16. The author discusses naturally occurring Pseudomonas fluorescens  bacteria in the 
first paragraph primarily in order to do which one of the following?  
(A) prove that increases in the level of such bacteria in the soil are the sole cause 
of soil suppressivit y 
(B) explain why yields increased after wheat fields were sprayed with altered 
Pseudomonas fluorescens  bacteria  
(C) detail the chemical processes that such bacteria use to suppress organisms 
parasitic to crop plants, such as wheat, sugar beets, and potato es 
(D) provide background information to support the argument that research into 
the agricultural use of genetically altered bacteria would be fruitful  
(E) argue that crop rotation is unnecessary, since diseases brought on by 
phytopathogens diminish in severity and eventually disappear on their own  
17. It can be inferred from the author s discussion of Pseudomonas fluorescens  
bacteria that which one of the following would be true of crops impervious  to 
parasitical organisms?  
(A) Pseudomonas fluorescens  bacteria would be absent from the soil surrounding 754 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 their roots.  
(B) They would crowd out and eventually exclude other crop plants if their 
growth were not carefully regulated.  
(C) Their yield would not be likely to be improved by adding Pseudomonas 
fluoresc ens bacteria to the soil.  
(D) They would mature more quickly than crop plants that were susceptible to 
parasitical organisms.  
(E) Levels of phytopathogenic bacteria in the soil surrounding their roots would 
be higher compared with other crop plants.  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that crop rotation can increase yields in part 
because  
(A) moving crop plants around makes them hardier and more resistant to disease  
(B) the number of Pseudomonas fluorescens  bacteria in the soil usually increases 
when  crops are rotated  
(C) the roots of many crop plants produce compounds that are antagonistic to 
phytopathogens harmful to other crop plants  
(D) the presence of phytopathogenic bacteria is responsible for the majority of 
plant diseases  
(E) phytopathogens typically attack some plant species but find other species to 
be unsuitable hosts  
19. According to the passage, proponents of the use of genetically altered bacteria in 
agriculture argue that which one of the following is true of the  altered bacteria 
used in the frost -damage experiments?  
(A) The altered bacteria had a genetic constitution differing from that of the 
normal strain only in that the altered variety had one less gene.  
(B) Although the altered bacteria competed effectively with the nonaltered strain 
in the laboratory, they were not as viable in natural environments.  
(C) The altered bacteria were much safer and more effective than the naturally 
occurring Pseudomonas fluorescens  bacteria used in earlier experiments.  
(D) The al tered bacteria were antagonistic to several types of naturally occurring 
phytopathogens in the soil surrounding the roots of frost -damaged crops.  
(E) The altered bacteria were released into the environment in numbers sufficient 
to guarantee the validity  of experimental results.  
20. Which one of the following, if true, would most seriously weaken the proponents  
argument regarding the safety of using altered Pseudomonas syringae  bacteria to 
control frost damage?  
(A) Pseudomonas syringae  bacteria are primi tive and have a simple genetic 
constitution.  
(B) The altered bacteria are derived from a strain that is parasitic to plants and 
can cause damage to crops.   LSAT  755 
 (C) Current genetic -engineering techniques permit the large -scale commercial 
production of such bacte ria. 
(D) Often genes whose presence is responsible for one harmful characteristic 
must be present in order to prevent other harmful characteristics.  
(E) The frost -damage experiments with Pseudomonas syringae  bacteria indicate 
that the altered variety wo uld only replace the normal strain if released in 
sufficient numbers.  
In 1887 the Dawes Act legislated wide -scale private ownership of reservation lands in the 
United States for Native Americans. The act allotted plots of 80 acres to each Native American 
adult. However, the Native Americans were not granted outright title to their lands. The act 
defined each grant as a trust patent , meaning that the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), the 
governmental agency in charge of administering policy regarding Native Americans, would hold 
the allotted land in trust  for 25 years, during which time the Native American owners could use, 
but not alienate (sell) the land. After the 25 -year period, the Native American allottee would 
receive a fee patent  awarding full legal ownership of the land.  
Two main reasons were advanced for the restriction on the Native Americans ability to sell 
their lands. First, it was claimed that free alienability would lead to immediate transfer of large 
amounts of former re servation land to non -Native Americans, consequently threatening the 
traditional way of life on those reservations. A second objection to free alienation was that 
Native Americans were unaccustomed to, and did not desire, a system of private landownership.  
Their custom, it was said, favored communal use of land.  
However, both of these arguments bear only on the transfer of Native American lands to 
non-Native Americans: neither offers a reason for prohibiting Native Americans from 
transferring land among the mselves. Selling land to each other would not threaten the Native 
American culture. Additionally, if communal land use remained preferable to Native Americans 
after allotment, free alienability would have allowed allottees to sell their lands back to the 
tribe. 
When stated rationales for government policies prove empty, using an interest -group 
model often provides an explanation. While neither Native Americans nor the potential 
non-Native American purchasers benefited from the restraint on alienation contai ned in the 
Dawes Act, one clearly defined group did benefit: the BIA bureaucrats. It has been convincingly 
demonstrated that bureaucrats seek to maximize the size of their staffs and their budgets in 
order to compensate for the lack of other sources of ful fillment, such as power and prestige. 
Additionally, politicians tend to favor the growth of governmental bureaucracy because such 
growth provides increased opportunity for the exercise of political patronage. The restraint on 
alienation vastly increased th e amount of work, and hence the budgets, necessary to 
implement the statute. Until allotment was ended in 1934, granting fee patents and leasing 
Native American lands were among the principal activities of the United States government. 
One hypothesis, then , for the temporary restriction on alienation in the Dawes Act is that it 
reflected a compromise between non -Native Americans favoring immediate alienability so they 
could purchase land and the BIA bureaucrats who administered the privatization system.  
21. Which one of the following best summarizes the main idea of the passage?  756 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (A) United States government policy toward Native Americans has tended to 
disregard their needs and consider instead the needs of non -Native American 
purchasers of land.  
(B) In order  to preserve the unique way of life on Native American reservations, 
use of Native American lands must be communal rather than individual.  
(C) The Dawes Act s restriction on the right of Native Americans to sell their land 
may have been implemented primari ly to serve the interests of politicians 
and bureaucrats.  
(D) The clause restricting free alienability in the Dawes Act greatly expanded 
United States governmental activity in the area of land administration.  
(E) Since passage of the Dawes Act in 1887, Native Americans have not been 
able to sell or transfer their former reservation land freely.  
22. Which one of the following statements concerning the reason for the end of 
allotment, if true, would provide t he most support for the authors view of 
politicians?  
(A) Politicians realized that allotment was damaging the Native American way of 
life. 
(B) Politicians decided that allotment would be more congruent with the Native 
American custom of communal land use.  
(C) Politicians believed that allotments continuation would not enhance their 
opportunities to exercise patronage.  
(D) Politicians felt that the staff and budgets of the BIA had grown too large.  
(E) Politicians were concerned that too much Native American land was falling 
into the hands of non -Native Americans.  
23. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) The passage of a law is analyzed in detail, the ben efits and drawbacks of one 
of its clauses are studied, and a final assessment of the law is offered.  
(B) The history of a law is narrated, the effects of one of its clauses on various 
populations are studied, and repeal of the law is advocated  
(C) A law is  examined, the political and social backgrounds of one of its clauses 
are characterized, and the permanent effects of the law are studied.  
(D) A law is described, the rationale put forward for one of its clauses is outlined 
and dismissed, and a different r ationale for the clause is presented.  
(E) The legal status of an ethnic group is examined with respect to issues of 
landownership and commercial autonomy, and the benefits to rival groups 
due to that status are explained.  
24. The author s attitude towar d the reasons advanced for the restriction on 
alienability in the Dawes Act at the time of its passage can best be described as  
(A) completely credulous  
(B) partially approving   LSAT  757 
 (C) basically indecisive  
(D) mildly questioning  
(E) highly skeptical  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that which one of the following was true of 
Native American life immediately before passage of the Dawes Act?  
(A) Most Native Americans supported themselves through farming.  
(B) Not many Native Americans personally owned th e land on which they lived.  
(C) The land on which most Native Americans lived had been bought from their 
tribes.  
(D) Few Native Americans had much contact with their non -Native American 
neighbors.  
(E) Few Native Americans were willing to sell their land to non -Native 
Americans.  
26. According to the passage, the type of landownership initially obtainable by 
Native Americans under the Dawes Act differed from the type of ownership 
obtainable after a 25-year period in that only the latter allowed  
(A) owners of land to farm it  
(B) owners of land to sell it  
(C) government some control over how owners disposed of land  
(D) owners of land to build on it with relatively minor governmental restrictions  
(E) government to charge owners a fee for developing their land  
27. Which of the following, if true, would most strengthen the author s argument 
regarding the true motivation for the passage of the Dawes Act?  
(A) The legislators who voted in favor of the Da wes Act owned land adjacent to 
Native American reservations.  
(B) The majority of Native Americans who were granted fee patents did not sell 
their land back to their tribes.  
(C) Native Americans managed to preserve their traditional culture even when 
they w ere geographically dispersed.  
(D) The legislators who voted in favor of the Dawes Act were heavily influenced 
by BIA bureaucrats.  
(E) Non -Native Americans who purchased the majority of Native American lands 
consolidated them into larger farm holdings.  
LSAT   08    SECTION III  
Time  35 minutes  28 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choic es could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 758 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
The law -and-literature movement claims to have introduced a valuable pedagogical 
innovation into legal study: instructing students in techniques of literary analysis for the 
purpose of interpreting laws and in the reciprocal use of legal analysis for the purpose of 
interpreting literary texts. The results, according to advocates, are not only conceptual 
breakthroughs in both law and literature but also more sensitive and humane lawyers. 
Whatever the truth of this last claim, there can be no doubt that the movement is a success: 
law-and-literature is an accepted subject in law journals and in leading law schools. Indeed, one 
indication of the movements strength is the fact that its most distinguished critic , Richard A. 
Posner, paradoxically ends up expressing qualified support for the move ment in a recent study 
in which he systematically refutes the writings of its leading legal scholars and cooperating 
literary critics.  
Critiquing the movements assumption that lawyers can offer special insights into literature 
that deals with legal matter s, Posner points out that writers of literature use the law loosely to 
convey a particular idea or as a metaphor for the workings of the society envisioned in their 
fiction. Legal questions per se, about which a lawyer might instruct readers, are seldom at  issue 
in literature. This is why practitioners of law -and-literature end up discussing the law itself far 
less than one might suppose . Movement leader James White, for example, in his discussion of 
arguments in the Iliad, barely touches on law, and then s o generally as to render himself 
vulnerable to Posners devastating remark that any argument can be analogized to a legal 
dispute.  
Similarly, the notion that literary criticism can be helpful in interpreting law is problematic. 
Posner argues that literar y criticism in general aims at exploring richness and variety of 
meaning in texts, whereas legal interpretation aims at discovering a single meaning. A literary 
approach can thus only confuse the task of interpreting the law, especially if one adopts curre nt 
fashions like deconstruction , which holds that all texts are inherently uninte rpretable.  
Nevertheless, Posner writes that law -and-literature is a field with promise. Why? Perhaps, 
recognizing the success of a movement that , in the past, has singled hi m out for abuse, he is 
attempting to appease his detractors, paying obeisance to the movements institutional success 
by declaring that it deserves a place in legal research while leaving it to others to draw the 
conclusion from his cogent analysis that i t is an entirely factitious undertaking, deserving of no 
intellectual respect whatsoever. As a result, his work stands both as a rebuttal of 
law-and-literature and as a tribute to the power it has come to exercise in academic circles.  
1. The primary purpos e of the passage is to  
(A) assess the law -and-literature movement by examining the position of one of 
its most prominent critics  
(B) assert that a mutually beneficial relationship exists between the study of law 
and the study of literature  
(C) provide exam ples of the law -and-literature movement in practice by 
discussing the work of its proponents  
(D) dismiss a prominent critics recent study of the law -and-literature movement   LSAT  759 
 (E) describe the role played by literary scholars in providing a broader context  for 
legal issues  
2. Posners stated position with regard to  the law -and-literature movement is most 
analogous to which one of the following?  
(A) a musician who is trained in the classics bu t frequently plays modern music 
while per forming on stage  
(B) a partisan who transfers allegiance to a new political party that demonstrates 
more promise but has fewer documented accomplishments  
(C) a sports fan who wholeheartedly supports the team most likely to win rather 
than his or her person al favorite  
(D) an ideologue  who remains committed to his or her own view of a subject in 
spite of compelling evidence to the contrary  
(E) a salesperson who describes the faults in a fashionable product while 
conceding that it may have some value  
3. The passage suggests that Posner regards legal practitioners as using an approach 
to interpreting law that  
(A) eschews discovery of multi ple meanings  
(B) employs techniques like deconstruction  
(C) interprets laws in light of varying community standards  
(D) is informed by the positions of literary critics  
(E) de -emphasizes the social relevance of the legal tradition  
4. The Passage suggest s that Posner might find legal training useful in the 
interpretation of a literary text in which  
(A) a legal dispute symbolizes the relationship between two characters  
(B) an oppressive law is used to symbolize an oppressive culture  
(C) one of the key issu es involves the answer to a legal question  
(D) a legal controversy is used to represent a moral conflict  
(E) the working of the legal system suggests something about the political 
character of a society  
5. The author uses the word success in line 11 to refer to the law -and-literature 
movements  
(A) positive effect on the sensitivity of lawyers  
(B) wides pread acceptance by law schools and law journals  
(C) ability to offer fresh insights into literary texts  
(D) ability to encourage innovative approaches in two disciplines  
(E) response to recent criticism in law journals  
6. According to the passage , Posn er argues that legal analysis is not generally useful 
in interpreting literature because  760 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (A) use of the law in literature is generally of a quite different nature than use of 
the law in legal practice  
(B) law is rarely used to convey important ideas in lit erature  
(C) lawyers do not have enough literary training to analyze literature competently  
(D) legal interpretations of literature tend to focus on legal issues to the exclusion 
of other important elements  
(E) legal interpretations are only relevant to contemporary literature  
7. According to Posner, the primary difficulty in using literary criticism to interpret 
law is that  
(A) the goals of the two disciplines are incompatible  
(B) there are few advocates  for the law -and-literature movement in the literary 
profession  
(C) the task of interpreting law is too complex for the techniques of literary 
criticism  
(D) the interpretation of law relies heavily on lega l precedent  
(E) legal scholars are reluctant to adopt the practice in the classroom  
A recent generation of historians of science, far from  portraying accepted scientific views 
as objectively accurate reflections of a natural world, explain the acceptance of such views in 
terms of the ideological biases of certain influential scientists or the institutional and rhetorical 
power such scientists wield. As an example of ideological bias, it has been argued that Pasteur 
rejected the theory of spontaneous generation  not because of experimental evidence but 
because he rejected the materialist ideology implicit in that doctrine. These historians seem to 
find allies in certain  philosophers of science who argue that scientific views are not imposed by 
reality but are free inventions of creative minds, and that scientific claims are never more than 
brave conjectures, always subject to inevitable future falsification. While these philosophers of 
science themselves would not be likely to have much truck with  the recent historians, it is an 
easy step from their views to the extremism of the historians.  
While this rejection of the traditional belief that scientific views are objective  reflections of 
the world may be fashionable, it is deeply implausible. We now know, for example, that water is 
made of hydrogen and oxygen and that parents each contribute one -half of their childrens 
complement of genes. I do not believe any serious -minded and informed person can claim that 
these statements are not factual descriptions of the world or that they will inevitably be 
falsified.  
However, sciences accumulation of lasting truths about the world is not by any means  a 
straightforward matter. We certainly need to get beyond the naive view that the truth will 
automatically reveal itself to any scientist who looks in the right direction; most often, in fact, a 
whole series of prior discoveries is needed to te ase realitys truths from experiment a nd 
observation. And the philosophers of science mentioned above are quite right to argue that new 
scientific ideas often correct old ones by indicating errors and imprecision (as , say, Newtons 
ideas did to Keplers). Nor would I deny that there are interesting questions to be answered 
about the social processes in which scientific activity is embedded. The persuasive processes by  LSAT  761 
 which particular scientific groups establish their experimental results as authoritative a re 
themselves social activities and can be rewardingly studied as such. Indeed, much of the new 
work in the history of science has been extremely revealing about the institutional interactions 
and rhetorical devices that help determine whose results achiev e prominence.  
But one can accept all this without accepting the thesis that natural reality never plays any 
part at all in determining what scientists believe. What the new historians ought to be showing 
us is how those doctrines that do in fact fit realit y work their way through the complex social 
processes of scientific activity to eventually receive general scientific acceptance.  
8. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to agree 
with which one of the following character izations of scientific truth?  
(A) It is often implausible.  
(B) It is subject to inevitable falsification.  
(C) It is rarely obvious and transparent . 
(D) It is rarely discovered by creative processes.  
(E) It is less often established by experimentation than by the rhetorical power of 
scientists.  
9. According to the passage , Keplers ideas provide an example of scientific ideas 
that were  
(A) corrected by subsequent inquiries  
(B) dependent on a series  of prior observations  
(C) originally thought to be imprecise and then later confirmed  
(D) established primarily by the force of an individuals rhetorical power  
(E) specifically taken up for the purpose of falsification by later scientists  
10. In the th ird paragraph of the passage , the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) presenting conflicting explanations for a phenomenon  
(B) suggesting a field for possible future research  
(C) qualifying a previously expressed point of view  
(D) providing an answer to  a theoretical question  
(E) attacking the assumptions that underlie a set of beliefs  
11. The use of the words any serious -minded and informed person (lines 28 -29) 
serves which one of the following functions in the context of the passage?  
(A) to satirize chronologically earl ier notions about the composition of water  
(B) to reinforce a previously stated opinion about certain philosophers of science  
(C) to suggest the authors reservations about the traditional belief mentioned 
in line 22  
(D) to anticipate objections from som eone who would argue for an objectively 
accurate description of the world  
(E) to discredit someone who would argue that certain scientific assertions do not 762 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 factually describe reality  
12. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would most likely agree with 
which one of the following statements about the relations hip between the views 
of certain philosophers of science (lines l2 -13) and those of the recent 
historians?  
(A) These two views are difficult to differentiate.  
(B) These two views share some similarities.  
(C) The views of the philosophers ought to be seen  as the source of the historians 
views.  
(D) Both views emphasize the rhetorical power of scientists.  
(E) The historians explicitly acknowledge that their views are indebted to those of 
the philosophers.  
13. Which one of the following best characterizes the authors assessment of the 
opinions of the new historians of science, as these opinions are pres ented in the 
passage?  
(A) They lack any credibility.  
(B) They themselves can be rewardingly studied as social phenomena.  
(C) They are least convincing when they concern the actions of scientific groups.  
(D) Although they are gross overstatements, they lead  to some valuable insights.  
(E) Although they are now popular, they are likely to be refused soon.  
14. In concluding the passage , the author does which one of the following?  
(A) offers a prescription  
(B) presents a paradox  
(C) makes a prediction  
(D) concedes an argument  
(E) an ticipates objections  
15. The authors attitude toward the thesis mentioned in line 56 is revealed in which 
one of the following pairs of words?  
(A) biases (line 5) and rhetorical (line 6)  
(B) wield (line 7) and falsification (line 17)  
(C) conject ures (line l6) and truck with (line 19)  
(D) extremism (line 20) and implausible (line 24)  
(E) naive (line 35) and errors (line 42)  
Until recently, it was thought that the Cherokee, a Native American tribe, were compelled 
to assimilate Euro -American culture during the 1820s. During that decade, it was supposed , 
White missionaries arrived  and, together with their part -Cherokee intermediaries, imposed the 
benefits of civilization on Cherokee tribes while the United States government actively 
promoted ac culturalization by encouraging the Cherokee to switch from hunting to settled  LSAT  763 
 agricultu re. This view was based on the assumption that the end of a Native American groups 
economic and political autonomy would automatically mean the end of its cultural autonomy as 
well. 
William G. McLaughlin has recently argued that not only did Cherokee cult ure flourish 
during and after the 1820s, but the Cherokee themselves actively and continually reshaped 
their culture. Missionaries did have a decisive impact during these years, he argues, but that 
impact was far from what it was intended to be. The missio naries tendency to cater to the 
interests of an acculturating part -Cherokee elite (who comprised the bulk of their converts) at 
the expense of the more traditionalist full -Cherokee majority created great intratribal tensions. 
As the elite initiated reform s designed to legitimize their own and the Cherokee Nations place in 
the new republic of the United States, antimission Cherokee reacted by fostering revivals of 
traditional religious beliefs and practices. However, these revivals did not, according to 
McLaughlin, undermine the elitist reforms, but supplemented them with popular traditionalist 
counterparts.  
Traditionalist Cherokee did not reject the elitist reforms outright , McLaughlin argues, 
simply because they recognized that there was more than one way  to use the skills the 
missionaries could provide them. As he quotes one group as saying, We want our children to 
learn English so that the White man cannot cheat us. Many traditionalists Cherokee welcomed 
the missionaries for another reason: they percei ved that it would be useful to have White allies. 
In the end, McLaughlin asserts, most members of the Cherokee council, including traditionalists, 
supported a move which preserved many of the reforms of the part -Cherokee elite but limited 
the activities an d influence of the missionaries and other White settlers. According to 
McLaughlin, the identity and culture that resulted were distinctively Cherokee, yet reflected the 
larger political and social setting in which they flourished.  
Because his work concentr ates on the nineteenth century, McLaughlin unfortunately 
overlooks earlier sources of influence, such as eighteen -century White resident traders and 
neighbors, thus obscuring the relative impact of the missionaries of the 1820s in contributing to 
both accu lturalization and resistance to it among the Cherokee. However, McLaughlin is 
undoubtedly correct in recognizing that culture is an ongoing process rather than a static entity, 
and he has made a significant contribution to our understanding of how Cherokee  culture 
changed while retaining its essential identity after confronting the missionaries.  
16. Which one of the following best states the main idea of the passage?  
(A) McLaughlins studies of the impact of missionaries on Cherokee culture 
during the 1820s  are fundamentally flawed, since McLaughlin ignores the 
greater impact of White resident traders in the eighteenth century.  
(B) Though his work is limited in perspective , McLaughlin is substantially 
correct that changes in Cherokee culture in the 1820s wer e mediated by the 
Cherokee themselves rather than simply imposed by the missionaries.  
(C) Although McLaughlin is correct in asserting that cultural changes among the 
Cherokee were autonomous and so not a result of the presence of 
missionaries, he overempha sizes the role of intertribal conflicts.  
(D) McLaughlin has shown that Cherokee culture not only flourished during and 764 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 after the 1820s, but that changes in Cherokee culture during this time 
developed naturally from elements already present in Cherokee cult ure. 
(E) Although McLaughlin overlooks a number of relevant factors in Cherokee 
cultural change in the 1820s, he convincingly demonstrates that these 
changes were fostered primarily by missionaries.  
17. Which one of the following statements regarding the Ch erokee council in the 
1820s can be inferred from the passage?  
(A) Members of the Cherokee council were elected democratically by the entire 
Cherokee Nation.  
(B) In order for a policy to come into effect for the Cherokee Nation, it had to 
have been approved  by a unanimous vote of the Cherokee council.  
(C) Despite the fact that the Cherokee were dominated politically and 
economically by the United States in the 1820s, the Cherokee council was 
able to override policies set by the United States government.  
(D) Though it did not have complete autonomy in governing the Cherokee Nation, 
it was able to set some policies affecting the activities of White people living 
in tribal areas.  
(E) The proportions of traditionalist and acculturating Cherokee in the Cherokee  
council were determined by the proportions of traditionalist and 
acculturating Cherokee in the Cherokee population.  
18. Which one of the following statements regarding the attitudes of traditionalist 
Cherokee toward the reforms that were instituted in the  1820s can be inferred 
from the passage?  
(A) They supported the reforms merely as a way of placating the increasingly 
voca l acculturating elite.  
(B) They thought that the reforms would lead to the destruction of traditional 
Cherokee culture but felt powerl ess to stop the reforms.  
(C) They supported the reforms only because they thought that they were 
inevitable and it was better that the reforms appear to have been initiated by 
the Cherokee themselves.  
(D) They believed that the reforms were a natural exten sion of already existing 
Cherokee traditions.  
(E) They viewed the reforms as a means of preserving the Cherokee Nation and 
protecting it against exploitation.  
19. According to the passage, McLaughlin cites which one of the following as a 
contributing factor in the revival of traditional religious beliefs among the 
Cherokee in the 1820s?  
(A) Missionaries were gaining converts at an increasing ra te as the 1820s 
progressed.  
(B) The traditionalist Cherokee majority thought that most of the reforms initiated  LSAT  765 
 by the missionaries converts would corrupt C herokee culture.  
(C) Missionaries unintentionally created conflict among the Cherokee by favoring 
the interests of the acculturating elite at the expense of the more traditionalist 
majority.  
(D) Traditionalist Cherokee recognized that only some of the refo rms instituted 
by a small Cherokee elite would be beneficial to all Cherokee.  
(E) A small group of Cherokee converted by missionaries attempted to institute 
reforms designed to acquire political supremacy for themselves in the 
Cherokee council.  
20. Whic h one of the following, if true, would most seriously undermine 
McLaughlins account of the course of reform among the Cherokee during the 
1820s?  
(A) Traditionalist Cherokee gained control over the majority of seats on the 
Cherokee council during the 1820s . 
(B) The United States government took an active interest in political and cultural 
developments within Native American tribes.  
(C) The missionaries living among the Cherokee in the 1820s were strongly in 
favor of the cultural reforms initiated by the acc ulturating elite.  
(D) Revivals of traditional Cherokee religious beliefs and practices began late in 
the eighteenth century, before the missionaries arrived.  
(E) The acculturating Cherokee elite of the 1820s did not view the reforms they 
initiated as be neficial to all Cherokee.  
21. It can be inferred from the authors discussion of McLaughlins views that the 
author thinks that Cherokee acculturalization in the 1820s  
(A) was reversed in the decades following the 1820s  
(B) may have been part of an already -existing process of acculturalization  
(C) could have been the result of earlier contacts with missionaries  
(D) would not have occurred without the encouragement of the United States 
government  
(E) was primarily a result of the influence of White traders living near the 
Cherokee  
In the history of nineteenth -century landscape painting in the United States, the Luminists 
are distinguished by their focus on atmosphere and light. The accepted vie w of Luminist 
paintings is that they are basically spiritual and imply a tranquil mysticism that contrasts with 
earlier American artists concept of nature as dynamic and energetic. According to this view, the 
Luminist atmosphere, characterized by pure an d constant light , guides the onlooker toward a 
lucid transcendentalism, an idealized vision of the world.  
What this view fails to do is to identify the true significance of this transcendental 
atmosphere in Luminist paintings. The prosaic factors that are  revealed by a closer examination 
of these works suggest that the glowing appearance of nature in Luminism is actually a sign of 766 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 natures domestication, its adaptation to human use. The idealized Luminist atmosphere thus 
seems to convey, not an intensifica tion of human responses to nature, but rather a muting of 
those emotions, like awe and fear , which untamed nature elicits.  
One critic, in describing the spiritual quality of harbor scenes by Fitz Hugh Lane, an 
important Luminist, carefully notes that at t he peak of Luminist development in the 1850s and 
1860s, spiritualism in America was extremely widespread. It is also true, however, that the 
1850s and 1860s were a time of trade expansion. From 1848 until his death in 1865 , Lane 
lived in a house with a vi ew of the harbor of Gloucester, Massachusetts, and he made short trips 
to Maine, New York, Baltimore, and probably Puerto Rico. In all of these places he painted the 
harbors with their ships the instruments of expanding trade.  
Lane usually depicts places l ike New York Harbor, with ships at anchor , but even when he 
depicts more remote, less commercially active harbors, nature appears pastoral and 
domesticated rather than primitive or unexplored. The ships, rather than the surrounding 
landscapes including  the sea are generally the active element in his pictures. For Lane the 
sea is, in effect, a canal or a trade route for commercial activity, not a free powerful element, as 
it is in the early pictures of his predecessor, Cole. For Lane nature is subdued, even when 
storms are approaching ; thus, the sea is always a viable highway for the transport of goods. In 
sum, I consider Lanes sea simply an environment for human activity nature no longer 
inviolate. The luminescence that Lane paints s ymbolizes natures humbled state, for the light 
itself is as docile as the Luminist sea, and its tranquility in a sense signifies no more than  good 
conditions on the highway to progress. Progress, probably even more than transcendenc e, is 
the secret message of Luminism. In a sense, Luminist pictures are an ideological justification of 
the atmosphere necessary for business, if also an exaggerated, idealistic rendering of that 
atmosphere.  
22. The passage is primarily concerned with disc ussing 
(A) the importance of religion to the art of a particular period  
(B) the way one artists work illustrates a tradition of painting  
(C) the significance of the sea in one artists work  
(D) differences in the treatment of nature as a more active or a less active force  
(E) variations in the artistic treatment of light among nineteenth -century 
landscape painters  
23. The author argues that nature is portrayed in Lanes pictures as  
(A) wild and unexplored  
(B) idealized and distant  
(C) continually changi ng 
(D) difficult to understand  
(E) subordinate to human concerns  
24. The passage contains information to suggest that the author would most probably 
agree with which one of the following statements?  
(A) The prevailing religious principles of a given tim e can be reflected in the art  LSAT  767 
 of that time.  
(B) In order to interest viewers, works of art must depict familiar subjects in 
detail.  
(C) Because commerce is unusual as a subject in art, the painter of commercial 
activity must travel and observe it widely.  
(D) Knowing about the environment in which an artist lived can aid in an 
understanding of a work by that artist.  
(E) The most popular works of art at a given time are devoted to furthering 
economic or social progress.  
25. According to the author, a supporter of the view of Luminism described in the 
first paragraph would most likely  
(A) be unimpressed by the paint ings glowing light  
(B) consider Luminist scenes to be undomesticated and wild  
(C) interpret the Luminist depiction of nature incorrectly  
(D) see Luminist paintings as practical rather than mystical  
(E) focus on the paintings subject matter instead of a n atmosphere and light  
26. According to the author, the sea is significant in Lanes paintings because of its 
association with  
(A) exploration  
(B) commerce  
(C) canals  
(D) idealism  
(E) mysticism  
27. The authors primary purpose is to  
(A) refute a new the ory 
(B) replace an inadequate analysis  
(C) summarize current critics attitudes  
(D) support another critics evaluation  
(E) describe the history of a misinterpretation  
28. The author quotes a critic writing about Lane (lines 25 -27) most probably in orde r 
to 
(A) suggest that Luminism was the dominant mode of painting in the 1850s and 
1860s  
(B) support the idea that Lane was interested in spiritualism  
(C) provide an example of the primary cultural factors that influenced the 
Luminists  
(D) explain why the d evelopment of Luminism coincided with that of spiritualism  
(E) illustrate a common misconception concerning an important characteristic of 768 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 Lanes paintings  
LSAT   09    SECTION III 
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the ba sis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers th e question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
After thirty years of investigation into cell genetics, researchers made startling discoveries 
in the 1960s and early 1970s which culminated in the development of processes, collectively  
known as recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (rDNA) technology, for the active manipulation of 
a cells genetic code. The technology has created excitement and controversy because it 
involves altering DNA which contains the building blocks of the genetic co de. 
Using rDNA technology, scientists can transfer a portion of the DNA from one organism to 
a single living cell of another. The scientist chemically snips the DNA chain of the host cell at a 
predetermined point and attaches another piece of DNA from a donor cell at that place, 
creating a completely new organism.  
Proponents of rDNA research and development claim that it will allow scientists to find 
cures for disease and to better understand how genetic information controls an organisms 
development. The y also see many other potentially practical benefits, especially in the 
pharmaceutical industry. Some corporations employing the new technology even claim that by 
the end of the century all major diseases will be treated with drugs derived from 
microorgani sms created through rDNA technology . Pharmaceutical products already developed, 
but not yet marketed, indicate that these predictions may be realized.  
Proponents also cite nonmedical applications for this technology. Energy production and 
waste disposal ma y benefit: genetically altered organisms could convert sewage and other 
organic material into met hane fuel. Agriculture might also take advantage of rDNA technology 
to produce new varieties of crops that resist foul weather, pests, and the effects of poor soil. 
A major concern of the critics of rDNA research is that genetically altered microorganisms 
might escape from the laboratory. Because these microorganisms are laboratory creations that, 
in all probability , do not occur in  nature, their interaction with the natural world cannot be 
predicted with certainty. It is possible that they could cause previously unknown, perhaps 
incurable diseases. The effect of genetically altered microorganisms on the worlds 
microbiological preda tor-prey relationships is another potentially serious problem pointed out 
by the opponents of rDNA research. Introducing a new species may disrupt or even destroy the 
existing ecosystem. The collapse of interdependent relationships among species, extrapola ted 
to its extreme, could eventually result in the destruction of humanity.  
Opponents of rDNA technology also cite ethical problems with it. For example, it gives 
scientists the power to instantly cross evolutionary and species boundaries that nature took 
millennia to establish. The implications of such power would become particularly profound if 
genetic engineers were to tinker with human genes, a practice that would bring us one step 
closer to Aldous Huxleys grim vision in Brave New World of a totalitari an society that engineers   LSAT  769 
 human beings to fulfill specific roles.  
1. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with doing which one of the 
following?  
(A) explaining the process and applications of rDNA technology  
(B) advocating continued rD NA research and development  
(C) providing evidence indicating the need for regulation of rDNA research and 
development  
(D) summarizing the controversy surrounding rDNA research and development  
(E) arguing that the environmental risks of rDNA technology may outweigh its 
medical benefits  
2. According to the passage, which one of the following is an accurate statement 
about research into the genetic code of cells?  
(A) It led to the development of processes for the manipulation of DNA.  
(B) It was initiated b y the discovery of rDNA technology.  
(C) It led to the use of new treatments for major diseases.  
(D) It was universally heralded as a great benefit to humanity.  
(E) It was motivated by a desire to create new organisms.  
3. The potential benefits of rDNA technology referred to in the passage include all 
of the following EXCEPT  
(A) new methods of waste treatment  
(B) new biological knowledge  
(C) enhanced food prod uction  
(D) development of less expensive drugs  
(E) increased energy production  
4. Which one of the following, if true, would most weaken an argument of 
opponents of rDNA technology?  
(A) New safety procedures developed by rDNA researchers make it impossi ble 
for genetically altered microorganisms to escape from laboratories.  
(B) A genetically altered microorganism accidentally released from a laboratory is 
successfully contained.  
(C) A particular rDNA -engineered microorganism introduced into an ecosystem 
attracts predators that keep its population down.  
(D) Genetically altered organisms designed to process sewage into methane 
cannot survive outside the waste treatment plant.  
(E) A specific hereditary disease that has plagued humankind for generations is 
successfully eradicated.  
5. The authors reference in the last sentence of the passage to a society that 
engineers human beings to fulfill specific roles serves to  770 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (A) emph asize the potential medical dangers of rDNA technology  
(B) advocate research on the use of rDNA technology in human genetics  
(C) warn of the possible disasters that could result from upsetting the balance of 
nature  
(D) present Brave New World  as an example  of a work of fiction that accurately 
predicted technological developments  
(E) illustrate the sociopolitical ramifications of applying genetic engineering to 
humans  
6. Which one of the following, if true, would most strengthen an argument of the 
opponents of rDNA technology?  
(A) Agricultural products developed through rDNA te chnology are no more 
attractive to consumers than are traditional crops.  
(B) Genetically altered microorganisms have no natural predators but can prey on 
a wide variety of other microorganisms.  
(C) Drugs produced using rDNA technology cost more to manufact ure than drugs 
produced with traditional technologies.  
(D) Ecosystems are impermanent systems that are often liable to collapse, and 
occasionally do so.  
(E) Genetically altered microorganisms generally cannot survive for more than a 
few hours in the natural environment.  
Gray marketing, the selling of trademarked products through channels of distribution not 
authorized by the trademark holder, can invol ve distribution of goods either within a market 
region or across market boundaries. Gray marketing within a market region (channel flow 
diversion) occurs when manufacturer -authorized distributors sell trademarked goods to 
unauthorized distributors who th en sell the goods to consumers within the same region. For 
example, quantity discounts from manufacturers may motivate authorized dealers to enter the 
gray market because they can purchase larger quantities of a product than they themselves 
intend to stock  if they can sell the extra units through gray marketing channels.  
When gray marketing occurs across market boundaries, it is typically in an international 
setting and may be called parallel importing. Manufacturers often produce and sell products in 
more than one country and establish a network of authorized dealers in each country. Parallel 
importing occurs when trademarked goods intended for one country are diverted from proper 
channels (channel flow diversion) and then exported to unauthorized distrib utors in another 
country.  
Trademark owners justifiably argue against  gray marketing practices since such practices 
clearly jeopardize the goodwill established by trademark owners: consumers who purchase 
trademarked goods in the gray mar ket do not get the same extended product, which typically 
includes pre - and postsale service. Equally important, authorized distributors may cease to 
promote the product if it becomes available for much lower prices through unauthorized 
channels.  
Current  debate over regulation of gray marketing focuses on three disparate theories in  LSAT  771 
 trademark law that have been variously and confusingly applied to parallel importation cases: 
universality, exhaustion, and territoriality. The theory of universality holds th at a trademark is 
only an indication of the source or origin of the product. This theory does not recognize the 
goodwill functions of a trademark. When the courts apply this theory, gray marketing practices 
are allowed to continue because the origin of the  product remains the same regardless of the 
specific route of the product through the channel of distribution. The exhaustion theory holds 
that a trademark owner relinquishes all rights once a product has been sold. When this theory is 
applied, gray market ing practices are allowed to continue because the trademark owners rights 
cease as soon as their products are sold to a distributor. The theory of territoriality holds that a 
trademark is effective in the country in which it is registered. Under the theor y of territoriality, 
trademark owners can stop gray marketing practices in the registering countries on products 
bearing their trademarks. Since only the territoriality theory affords trademark owners any real 
legal protection against gray marketing practi ces, I believe it is inevitable as well as desirable 
that it will come to be consistently applied in gray marketing cases.  
7. Which one of the following best expresses the main point of the passage?  
(A) Gray marketing is unfair to trademark owners and shou ld be legally 
controlled.  
(B) Gray marketing is practiced in many different forms and places, and 
legislators should recognize the futility of trying to regulate it.  
(C) The mechanisms used to control gray marketing across markets are different 
from those most effective in controlling gray marketing within markets.  
(D) The three trademark law theories that have been applied in gray marketing 
cases lead to different case outcomes.  
(E) Current theories used to interpret trademark laws have resulted in incr eased 
gray marketing activity.  
8. The function of the passage as a whole is to  
(A) criticize the motives and methods of those who practice gray marketing  
(B) evaluate the effects of both channel flow diversion and parallel importation  
(C) discuss the metho ds that have been used to regulate gray marketing and 
evaluate such methods degrees of success  
(D) describe a controversial marketing practice and evaluate several legal views 
regarding it  
(E) discuss situations in which certain marketing practices are common and 
analyze the economic factors responsible for their development  
9. Which one of the following does the author offer as an argument against gray 
marketing?  
(A) Manufacturers find it difficult to monitor the effectiveness of promotional 
efforts made on behalf of products that are gray marketed.  
(B) Gray marketing can discourage product promotion by authorized distributors.  
(C) Gray marketing forces manufacturers to accept the low pr ofit margins that 772 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 result from quantity discounting.  
(D) Gray marketing discourages competition among unauthorized dealers.  
(E) Quality standards in the manufacture of products likely to be gray marketed 
may decline.  
10. The information in the passage suggests that proponents of the theory of 
territoriality would probably differ from proponents of the theory of exhaustion 
on which one of the following issues?  
(A) the right of trademark owners to enforce, in countries in which the trademarks 
are registered, distribution agreements intended to restrict distribution to 
authorized channels  
(B) the right of trademark owners to se ll trademarked goods only to those 
distributors who agree to abide by distribution agreements  
(C) the legality  of channel flow diversion that occurs in a country other than the 
one in which a trademark is registered  
(D) the significance consumers attach to  a trademark  
(E) the usefulness of trademarks as marketing tools  
11. The author discusses the impact of gray marketing on goodwill in order to  
(A) fault trademark owners for their unwillingness to offer a solution to a major 
consumer complaint against g ray marketing  
(B) indicate a way in which manufacturers sustain damage against which they 
ought to be protected  
(C) highlight one way in which gray marketing across markets is more 
problematic than gray marketing within a market  
(D) demonstrate that gray m arketing does not always benefit the interests of 
unauthorized distributors  
(E) argue that consumers are unwilling to accept a reduction in price in exchange 
for elimination of service  
12. The authors attitude toward the possibility that the courts will come to exercise 
consistent control over gray marketing practices can bes t be characterized as one 
of 
(A) resigned tolerance  
(B) utter dismay  
(C) reasoned optimism  
(D) unbridled fervor  
(E) cynical indifference  
13. It can be inferred from the passage that some channel flow diversion might be 
eliminated if  
(A) profit margins o n authorized distribution of goods were less than those on 
goods marketed through parallel importing   LSAT  773 
 (B) manufacturers relieved authorized channels of all responsibility for product 
promotion  
(C) manufacturers charged all authorized distributors the same u nit price for 
products regardless of quantity purchased  
(D) the postsale service policies of authorized channels were controlled by 
manufacturers  
(E) manufacturers refused to provide the extended product to consumers who 
purchase goods in the gray market  
Any study of autobiographical narratives that appeared under the ostensible authorship of 
African American writers between 1760 and 1865 inev itably raises concerns about authenticity 
and interpretation. Should an autobiography whose written composition was literally out of the 
hands of its narrator be considered as the literary equivalent of those autobiographies that were 
authored independentl y by their subjects?  
In many cases, the so -called edited narrative of an ex -slave ought to be treated as a 
ghostwritten account insofar as  literary analysis is concerned , especially when it was composed 
by its editor from a statement of facts provided by  an African American subject. Blassin game 
has taken pains to show that the editors of several of the more famous antebellum slave 
narratives were noted for their integrity and thus were unlikely to distort the facts given them 
by slave narrators. From a literary standpoint, however, it is not the moral integrity of these 
editors that is at issue  but the linguistic, structural, and tonal integrity of th e narratives they 
produces. Even if an editor faithfully reproduced the facts of a narrators life, it was still the 
editor who decided what to make of these facts, how they should be emphasized, in what order 
they ought to be presented, and what was extra neous or germane. Readers of African 
American autobiography then and now have too readily accepted the presumption of these 
eighteenth - and nineteenth -century editors that experiential facts recounted orally could be 
recorded and sorted by an amanuensis -editor, taken out of their original contexts, and then 
published with editorial prefaces, footnotes, and appended commentary, all without 
compromising the validity of the narrative as a product of an African American consciousness.  
Transcribed narratives in which an editor explicitly delimits his or her role undoubtedly may 
be regarded as more authentic and reflective of the narrators thought in action  than those 
edited works that flesh out a statement of facts in ways unaccounted for. Still, it would be na  ve 
to accord dictated oral narrati ves the same status as autobiographies composed and written by 
the subjects of the stories themselves. This point is illustrated by an analysis of Works Progress 
Administration interviews with ex -slaves in the 1930s that suggests that narrators often told 
interviewers what they seemed to want to hear. If it seemed impolitic for former slaves to tell all 
they knew and thought about the past to interviewers in the 1930s, the same could be said of 
escaped slaves on the run in the antebellum era. Dictated narra tives, therefore, are literary 
texts whose authenticity is difficult to determine. Analysts should reserve close analytic 
readings for independently authored texts. Discussion of collaborative texts should take into 
account the conditions that governed the ir production.  
14. Which one of the following best summarizes the main point of the passage?  
(A) The personal integrity of an autobiographys editor has little relevance to its 774 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 value as a literary work.  
(B) Autobiographies dictated to editors are less valu able as literature than are 
autobiographies authored by their subjects.  
(C) The facts that are recorded in an autobiography are less important than the 
personal impressions of its author.  
(D) The circumstances under which an autobiography was written shoul d affect 
the way it is interpreted as literature.  
(E) The autobiographies of African Americans written between 1760 and 1865 
deserve more careful study than they have so far received.  
15. The information in the passage suggests that the role of the editor (lines 23 -24) 
is most like that of  
(A) an ar tist who wishes to invent a unique method of conveying the emotional 
impact of a scene in a painting  
(B) a worker who must interpret the instructions of an employer  
(C) a critic who must provide evidence to support opinions about a play being 
reviewed  
(D) an architect who must make the best use of a natural setting in designing a 
public building  
(E) a historian who must decide how to direct the reenactment  of a historical 
event  
16. Which one of the following best describes the authors opinion about applying 
literary analysis to edited autobiographies?  
(A) The author is adamantly opposed to th e application of literary analysis to 
edited autobiographies.  
(B) The author is skeptical of the value of close analytical reading in the case of 
edited autobiographies.  
(C) The author believe s that literary analysis of the prefaces, footnotes, and 
comment aries that accompany edited autobiographies would be more useful 
than an analysis of the text of the autobiographies.  
(D) The author believes that an exclusively literary analysis of edited 
autobiographies is more valuable than a reading that emphasizes th eir 
historical import.  
(E) The author believes that the literary analysis of edited autobiographies would 
enhance their linguistic, structural, and tonal integrity.  
17. The passage supports which one of the following statements about the readers of 
autobiographies of African Americans that were published between 1760 and 
1865?  
(A) The y were more concerned with the personal details in the autobiographies 
than with their historical significance.  
(B) They were unable to distinguish between ghostwritten and edited  LSAT  775 
 autobiographies.  
(C) They were less na  ve about the facts of slave life than are readers today.  
(D) They presumed that the editing of the autobiographies did not affect their 
authenticity.  
(E) They had little interest in the moral integrity of the editors of the 
autobiographies.  
18. When one of the following words, as it is used in the passage, best serves to 
underscore the authors concerns about the authenticity of the autobiographies 
discussed?  
(A) ostensible (line 2)  
(B) integrity (line 18)  
(C) extraneous (line 27)  
(D) delimits (line 39)  
(E) impolitic (line 51)  
19. According to the passage, close analytic reading of an autobiography is 
appropriate only when the  
(A) autobi ography has been dictated to an experienced amanuensis -editor  
(B) autobiography attempts to reflect the narrators thought in action  
(C) autobiography was authored independently by its subject  
(D) moral integrity of the autobiographys editor is well estab lished  
(E) editor of the autobiography collaborated closely with its subject in its editing  
20. It can be inferred that the discussion in the passage of Blassingames work 
primarily serves which one of the following purposes?  
(A) It adds an authoritys endors ement to the authors view that edited narratives 
ought to be treated as ghostwritten accounts.  
(B) It provides an example of a mistaken emphasis in the study of autobiography.  
(C) It presents an account of a new method of literary analysis to be applied t o 
autobiography.  
(D) It illustrates the inadequacy of traditional approaches to the analysis of 
autobiography.  
(E) It emphasizes the importance of the relationship between editor and narrator.  
A conventional view of nineteenth -century Britain holds that iron manufacturers and textile 
manufacturers from the north of England became the wealthiest and most powerfu l people in 
society after about 1832.  According to Marxist historians, these industrialists were the target of 
the working class in its struggle for power. A new study by Rubinstein, however, suggests that 
the real wealth lay with the bankers and merchants  of London. Rubinstein does not deny that a 
northern industrial elite existed but argues that it was consistently outnumbered and outdone 
by a London -based commercial elite. His claims are provocative and deserve consideration.  
Rubinsteins claim about the  location of wealth comes from his investigation of probate 776 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 records. These indicate the value of personal property, excluding real property (buildings and 
land), left by individuals at death. It does seem as if large fortunes were more frequently made 
in commerce than in industry and, within industry, more frequently from alcohol or tobacco 
than from textiles or metal. However, such records do not unequivocally make Rubinsteins case . 
Uncertainties abound about how the probate rules for valuing assets were actually applied. Mills 
and factories, being real property, were clearly excluded: machinery may also have been, for 
the same reason. What the valuation conventions were for stock -in-trade (goods for sale) is 
also uncertain. It is possible that their proba te values were much lower than their actual market 
value: cash or near -cash, such as bank balances or stocks, were, on the other hand, invariably 
considered at full face value. A further complication is that probate valuations probably took no 
notice of a businesss goodwill (favor with the public) which, since it represents expectations 
about future profit -making, would today very often be a large fraction of market value. Whether 
factors like these introduced systematic biases into the probate valuations of individuals with 
different types of businesses would be worth investigating.  
The orthodox view that the wealthiest individuals were the most powerful is also 
questioned by Rubinsteins study. The problem for this orthodox view is that Rubinstein finds 
many millionaires who are totally unknown to nineteenth -century historians: the reason for 
their obscurity could be that they were not powerful. Indeed, Rubinstein dismisses any notion 
that great wealth had anything to do with entry into the governing elite , as represented by 
bishops, higher civil servants, and chairmen of manufacturing companies. The only 
requirements were university attendance and a father with a middle -class income.  
Rubinstein, in another study, has begun to buttress his findings about th e location of 
wealth by analyzing income tax returns, which reveal a geographical distribution of middle -class 
incomes similar to that of wealthy incomes revealed by probate records. But until further 
confirmatory investigation is done, his claims can only  be considered partially convincing.  
21. The main idea of the passage is that  
(A) the Marxist interpretation of the relationship between class and power in 
nineteenth -century Britain is no longer viable  
(B) a simple equation between wealth and power is unl ikely to be supported by 
new data from nineteenth -century British archives  
(C) a recent historical investigation has challenged but not disproved the orthodox 
view of the distribution of wealth and the relationship of wealth to power in 
nineteenth -century Britain  
(D) probate records provide the historian with a revealing but incomplete glimpse 
of the extent and location of wealth in nineteenth -century Britain  
(E) an attempt has been made to confirm the findings of a new historical study of 
nineteenth -century Britain, but complete confirmation is likely to remain 
elusive  
22. The author of the passage implies that probate records as a source of information 
about wealth in nineteenth -century Britain are  
(A) self -contradictory and misleading   LSAT  777 
 (B) ambiguous and outdated  
(C) controversial but readily available  
(D) revealing but difficult to interpret  
(E) widely used by historians but fully understandable only by  specialists  
23. The author suggests that the total probate valuations of the personal property of 
individuals holding goods for sale in nineteenth -century Britain may have been  
(A) affected by the valuation conventions for such goods  
(B) less accurate tha n the valuations for such goods provided by income tax 
returns  
(C) less, on average, if such goods were tobacco -related than if they were 
alcohol -related  
(D) greater, on average, than the total probate valuations of those individuals who 
held bank balances  
(E) dependent on whether such goods were held by industrialists or by merchants 
or bankers  
24. According to the passage, Rubinstein has provided evidence that challenges 
which one of the following claims about nineteenth -century Britain?  
(A) The distri bution of great wealth between commerce and industry was not 
equal.  
(B) Large incomes were typically made in alcohol and tobacco rather than in 
textiles and metal.  
(C) A London -based commercial elite can be identified.  
(D) An official governing elite can b e identified.  
(E) There was a necessary relationship between great wealth and power.  
25. The author mentions that goodwill was probably excluded from the probate 
valuation of a business in nineteenth -century Britain most likely in order to  
(A) give an example of a b usiness asset about which little was known in the 
nineteenth century  
(B) suggest that the probate valuations of certain businesses may have been 
significant underestimations of their true market value  
(C) make the point that this exclusion probably had an equal impact on the 
probate valuations of all nineteenth -century British businesses  
(D) indicate that expectations about future profit -making is the single most 
important factor in determining the market value of certain businesses  
(E) argue that the twentieth -century method of determining probate valuations of 
a business may be consistently superior to the nineteenth -century method  
26. Which one of the following studies would provide support for Rubinsteins 
claims?  
(A) a study that indicated that many members of the commercial elite in 778 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 nineteenth -century London had insignificant holdings of real property  
(B) a study that indicated that in the nineteenth century, industrialists from the 
north of England were in fact a target for working -class people  
(C) a study that indicated that, in nineteenth -century Britain, probate values of 
goods for sale were not as high as probate values of cash assets  
(D) a study that indicated that the wealth of nineteenth -century British 
industrialists did not appear to be significantly greater when the full value of 
their real property holdings was actually considered  
(E) a study that indicated that at least some members of the official governing 
elite in nineteenth -century Britain owned more real pr operty than had 
previously been thought to be the case  
27. Which one of the following, if true, would cast the most doubt on Rubinsteins 
argument concerning wealth and the official governing elite in nineteenth -century 
Britain?  
(A) Entry into this elite w as more dependent on university attendance than on 
religious background.  
(B) Attendance at a prestigious university was probably more crucial than a 
certain minimum family income in gaining entry into this elite.  
(C) Bishops as a group were somewhat wealth ier, at the point of entry into this 
elite, than were higher civil servants or chairmen of manufacturing 
companies.  
(D) The families of many members of this elite owned few, if any, shares in iron 
industries and textile industries in the north of England.  
(E) The composition of this elite included vice -chancellors, many of whom held 
office because of their wealth.  
LSAT   10    SECTION I  
Time  35 minutes  27 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answere d on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely  answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
Many argue that recent developments in electronic technology such as computers and 
videotape have enabled artists to vary their forms of expression. For example, video art can  
now achieve images whose effect is produced by digitalization : breaking up the picture using 
computerized information processing. Such new technologies create new ways of seeing and 
hearing by adding different dimensions to older forms, rather than repl acing those forms. 
Consider Locale , a film about a modern dance company. The camera operator wore a 
Steadicam TM, an uncomplicated device that allows a camera to be mounted on a person so 
that the camera remains steady no matter how the operator moves. The Steadicam TM captures 
the dance in ways impossible with traditional mounts. Such new equipment also allows for the  LSAT  779 
 preservation of previously unrecordable aspects of performances, thus enriching archives.  
By Contrast, others claim that technology subverts t he artistic enterprise: that artistic 
efforts achieved with machines preempt human creativity, rather than being inspired by it. The 
originality of musical performance, for example, might suffer, as musicians would be deprived of 
the opportunity to spontan eously change pieces of music before live audiences . Some even 
worry that technology will eliminate live performance altogether ; performances will be recorded 
for home viewing , abolishing the relationship between performer and audience. But these 
negative views assume both that technology poses an unprecedented challenge to the arts and 
that we are not committed enough to the artistic enterprise to preserve the live performance , 
assumptions that seem unnecessarily cynical. In fact, technology has traditiona lly assisted our 
capacity for creative expression and can refine our notions of any give art form.  
For example, the portable camera and the snapshot were developed at the same time as 
the rise of impressionist painting in the nineteenth century. These phot ographic technologies 
encouraged a new appreciation. In addition, impressionist artists like Degas studied the 
elements of light and movement captured by instantaneous photography and used their new 
understanding of the way our perceptions distort reality to try to more accurately capture realty 
in their work. Since photo s can capture the moments of a movement, such as a hand partially 
raised in a gesture of greeting , Impressionist artists were inspired to paint such moments in 
order to more effectively c onvey the quality of spontaneous human action. Photography freed 
artists from the preconception that a subject should be painted in a static, artificial entirety, and 
inspired them to capture the random and fragmentary qualities of our world. Finally, sinc e 
photography preempted painting as the means of obtaining portraits, painters had more 
freedom to vary their subject matter, thus giving rise to the abstract creations characteristic of 
modern art.  
1. Which one of the following statements best expresses t he main idea of the 
passage?  
(A) The progress of art relies primarily on technology.  
(B) Technological innovation can be beneficial to art.  
(C) There are risks associated with using technology to create art.  
(D) Technology will transform the way the public  responds to art.  
(E) The relationship between art and technology has a lengthy history.  
2. It can be inferred from the passage that the author shares which one of the 
following opinions with the opponents of the use of new technology in art?  
(A) The li ve performance is an important aspect of the artistic enterprise.  
(B) The publics commitment to the artistic enterprise is questionable.  
(C) Recent technological innovations present an entirely new sort of challenge to 
art. 
(D) Technological innovations o f the past have been very useful to artists.  
(E) The performing arts are especially vulnerable to technological innovation.  
3. Which one of the following, if true, would most undermine the position held by 780 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 opponents of the use of new technology in art concerning the effect of technology 
on live p erformance?  
(A) Surveys show that when recordings of performances are made available for 
home viewing, the public becomes far more knowledgeable about different 
performing artists.  
(B) Surveys show that some people feel comfortable responding spontaneously  to 
artistic performances when they are viewing recordings of those 
performances at home.  
(C) After a live performance, sales of recordings for home viewing of the 
particular performing artist generally increase.  
(D) The distribution of recordings of artis ts performances has begun to attract 
many new audience members to their live performances.  
(E) Musicians are less apt to make creative changes in musical pieces during 
recorded performances than during live performances.  
4. The author uses the example of the Steadicam TM primarily in order to suggest 
that 
(A) the filming of performances should not be limited by inadequate equipment  
(B) new technologies do not need to be very complex in order to benefit art  
(C) the interaction of a traditional art form wi th a new technology will change 
attitudes toward technology in general  
(D) the replacement of a traditional technology with a new technology will 
transform definitions of a traditional art form  
(E) new technology does not so much preempt as enhance a traditional art form  
5. According to the passage, proponents of the use of new electronic technology in 
the arts claim that which one of the following is true?  
(A) Most people who reject the use of electronic technology in art forget that 
machines require a person to operate them . 
(B) Electronic technology allows for the expansion of archives because longer 
performances can be recorded . 
(C) Electronic technology assists artists in finding new ways  to present their 
material . 
(D) Electronic technology makes the practice of any art form more efficient by 
speeding up the creative process . 
(E) Modern dance is the art form that will probably benefit most from the use of 
electronic technology . 
6. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would agree with which one of 
the following statements regarding changes in painting since th e nineteenth 
century?  
(A) The artistic experiments of the nineteenth century led painters to use a variety 
of methods in creating portraits, which they then applied to other subject  LSAT  781 
 matter.  
(B) The nineteenth -century knowledge of light and movement provide d by 
photography inspired the abstract works characteristic of modern art.  
(C) Once painters no longer felt that they had to paint conventional portraits , they 
turned exclusively to abstract portraiture.  
(D) Once painters were less limited to the impressio nist style, they were able to 
experiment with a variety of styles of abstract art.  
(E) Once painters painted fewer conventional portraits, they had greater 
opportunity to move beyond the literal depiction of objects.  
During the 1940s and 1950s the Unite d States government developed a new policy toward 
Native Americans, often know n as readjustment. Because the increased awareness of civil 
rights in these decades helped reinforce the belief that life on reservations prevented Native 
Americans from exerci sing the rights guaranteed to citizens under the United States 
Constitution, the readjustment movement advocated the end of the federal governments 
involvement in Native American affairs and encouraged the assimilation of Native Americans as 
individuals i nto mainstream society. However, the same years also saw the emergence of a 
Native American leadership and efforts to develop tribal instructions and reaffirm tribal identity. 
The clash of these two trends may be traced in the attempts on the part of the B ureau o f Indian 
Affairs (BIA) to convince the Oneida tribe of Wisconsin to accept readjustment.  
The culmination of BIA efforts to sway the Oneida occurred at a meeting that took place in 
the fall of 1956.  The BIA suggested that it would be to the Oneidas benefit to own their own 
property and, like other homeowners, pay real estate taxes on it. The BIA also emphasized that, 
after readjustment, the government would not attempt to restrict Native Americans ability to 
sell their individually owned lands. The Oneida were then offered a one -time lump -sum 
payment of $60,000 in lieu of  the $0.52 annuity guaranteed in perpetuity to each member of 
the tribe under the Canandaigua Treaty . 
The efforts of the BIA to sell readjustment to the tribe failed because the Oneida realized 
that they had heard similar offers before. The Oneid a delegates reacted negatively to the BIAs 
first suggestion because taxation of Native American lands had been one past vehicle for 
dispossessing the Oneida: after the distribution of some tribal lands to individual Native 
Americans in the late nineteenth  century, Native American lands became subject to taxation, 
resulting in new and impossible financial burdens, foreclosures, and subsequent tax sales of 
property. The Oneida delegates were equally suspicious of the BIAs emphasis on the rights of 
individua l landowners, since in the late nineteenth century many individual Native Americans 
had been convinced by unscrupulous speculators to sell their lands. Finally, the offer of a 
lump-sum payment was unanimously opposed by the Oneida delegates, who saw that c hanging 
the terms of a treaty might jeopardize the many pending land claims based upon the treaty.  
As a result of the 1956 meeting, the Oneida rejected readjustment. Instead, they 
determined to improve tribal life by lobbying for federal monies for postsec ondary education, 
for the improvement of drainage on tribal lands, and for the building of a convalescent home for 
tribal members. Thus, by learning the lessons of history, the Oneida were able to survive as a 
tribe in their homeland.  782 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 7. Which one of the f ollowing would be most consistent with the policy of 
readjustment described in the passage?  
(A) the establishment among Native Americans of a tribal system of a elected 
government  
(B) the creation of a national project to preserve Native American language and 
oral history  
(C) the establishment of programs to encourage Native Americans to move from 
reservations to urban areas  
(D) the development of a large -scale effort to restore Native American lands to 
their original tribes  
(E) the reaffirmation of fede ral treaty obligations to Native American tribes  
8. According to the passage, after the 1956 meeting the Oneida resolved to  
(A) obtain improved social services and living conditions for members of the 
tribe 
(B) pursue litigation designed to reclaim tribal lands  
(C) secure recognition of their unique status as a self -governing Native American 
nation within the United States  
(D) establish new kinds of tribal institutions  
(E) cultivate a life -style similar to that of other United States citizens  
9. Which one of the following best describes the function of the first paragraph in 
the context of the passage as a whole?  
(A) It summarizes the basis of a conflict underlying n egotiations described 
elsewhere in the passage . 
(B) It presents two positions, one of which is defended by evidence provided in 
succeeding paragraphs.  
(C) It compares competing interpretations of a historical conflict.  
(D) It analyzes the causes of a speci fic historical event and predicts a future 
development.  
(E) It outlines the history of a government agency.  
10. The author refers to the increased awareness of civil rights during the 1940s and 
1950s most probably in order to  
(A) contrast the readjustment movement with other social phenomena  
(B) account for  the stance of the Native American leadership  
(C) help explain the impetus for the readjustment movement  
(D) explain the motives of BIA bureaucrats  
(E) foster support for the policy of readjustment  
11. The passage suggest s that advocates of readjustment  would most likely agree 
with which one of the following statements regarding the relationship between  LSAT  783 
 the federal government and Native Americans?  
(A) The federal government should work with individual Native Americans to 
improve life on reservations.  
(B) The federal government should be no more involved in the affaires of Native 
Americans than in the affairs of other citizens.  
(C) The federal government should assume more responsibility for providing 
social services to Native Americans.  
(D) The federal go vernment should share its responsibility for maintaining Native 
American territories with tribal leaders.  
(E) The federal government should observe all provisions of treaties made in the 
past with Native Americans.  
12. The passage suggests that the Onei da delegates viewed the Canandaigua Treaty as  
(A) a valuable safeguard of certain Oneida rights and privileges  
(B) the source of many past problems for the Oneida tribe  
(C) a model for the type of agreement they hoped to reach with the federal 
government  
(D) an important step toward recognition of their status as an independent Native 
American nation  
(E) an obsolete agreement without relevance for their current condition  
13. Which one of the following situations most closely parallels that of the Oneida 
delegates in refusing to accept a lump -sum payment of $60,000?  
(A) A university offers s a stude nt a four -year scholarship with the stipulation that 
the student not accept any outside employment; the student refuses the offer 
and attends a different school because the amount of the scholarship would 
not have covered living expenses.  
(B) A company see king to reduce its payroll obligations offers an employee a 
large bonus if he will accept early retirement; the employee refuses because 
he does not want to compromise an outstanding workers compensation suit.  
(C) Parents of a teenager offer to pay her at  the end of the month for performing 
weekly chores rather than paying her on a weekly basis; the teenager refuses 
because she has a number of financial obligations that she must meet early in 
the month.  
(D) A car dealer offers a customer a $500 cash paymen t for buying a new car; the 
customer refuses because she does not want to pay taxes on the amount, and 
requests instead that her monthly payments be reduced by a proportionate 
amount.  
(E) A landlord offers a tenant several months rent -free in exchange for the 
tenants agreeing not to demand that her apartment be painted every two 
years, as is required by the lease; the tenant refuses because she would have 
to spend her own time pain ting the apartment.  784 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 Direct observation of contemporary societies at the threshold of  widespread literacy has 
not assisted our understanding of how such literacy altered ancient Greek society, in particular 
its political cultu re. The discovery of what Goody has called the enabling effects of literacy in 
contemporary societies tends to seduce  the observer into confusing often rudimentary 
knowledge of how to read with popular access to important books and documents: this 
confus ion is then projected onto ancient societies. In ancient Greece, Goody writes, 
alphabetic reading and writing was important for the development of political democracy.  
An examination of the ancient Greek city Athens exemplifies how this sort of confusi on is 
detrimental to understanding ancient politics. In Athens, the early development of a written law 
code was retrospectively mythologized as the critical factor in breaking the power monopoly of 
the old aristocracy : hence the Greek tradition of the law -giver, which has captured the 
imaginations of scholars like Goody.  But the application and efficacy of all law codes depend on 
their interpretation by magistrates and courts, and unless the right of interpretation is 
democratized, the mere existence of  written laws changes little.  
In fact, never in antiquity did any but the elite consult documents and books. Even in Greek 
courts the juries heard only the relevant statu tes read out  during the proceedings, as they 
heard verbal testimo ny, and they then rendered their verdict on the spot , without the benefit of 
any discussion among themselves. True, in Athens the juries were representative of a broad 
spectrum of the population, and these juries, drawn from diverse s ocial classes, both 
interpreted what they had heard and determined matters of fact. However, they guided solely 
by the speeches prepared for the parties by professional pleaders and by the quotations of laws 
or decrees with in the speeches, rather than by t heir own access to any kind of document o r 
book.  
Granted, people today also rely heavily on a truly knowledgeable minority for information 
and its interpretation, often transmitted orally. Yet this is still fundamentally different from an 
ancient society i n which there was no popular literature, i.e., no newspapers, magazines, or 
other media that dealt with sociopolitical issues. An ancient law code would have been 
analogous to the Latin Bible, a venerated document but a closed book. The resistance of the  
medieval Church to vernacular translations of the Bible, in the West at least, is therefore a 
pointer to the realities of ancient literacy. When fundamental documents are accessible for 
study only to an elite, the rest of the society is subject to the eli tes interpretation of the rules of 
behavior, including right political behavior. Athens, insofar as it functioned as a democracy, did 
so not because of widespread literacy, but because the elite had chosen to accept democratic 
institutions.  
14. Which one of the following statements best expresses the main idea of the 
passage?  
(A) Democratic political institutions grow organically from the traditions and 
conventions of a society.  
(B) Democratic political institutions are not necessarily the outcome of liter acy in 
a society.  
(C) Religious authority, like political authority, can determine who in a given 
society will have access to important books and documents.   LSAT  785 
 (D) Those who are best educated are most often those who control the institutions 
of authority in a  society.  
(E) Those in authority have a vested interest in ensuring that those under their 
control remain illiterate.  
15. It can be inferred from the passage that the author assumes which one of the 
following about societies in which the people possess a rudimen tary reading 
ability?  
(A) They are more politically advanced than societies without rudimentary 
reading ability.  
(B) They are unlikely to exhibit the positive effects of literacy.  
(C) They are rapidly evolving toward widespread literacy.  
(D) Many of their people might not have access to important documents and 
books.  
(E) Most of their people would not participate in political decision -making.  
16. The author refers to the truly knowledgeable minority in contemporary societies 
in the context of the fourth paragraph in order to imply which one of the 
following?  
(A) Be cause they have a popular literature that closes the gap between the elite 
and the majority, contemporary societies rely far less on the knowledge of 
experts than did ancient societies.  
(B) Contemporary societies rely on the knowledge of experts, as did an cient 
societies, because contemporary popular literature so frequently conveys 
specious information.  
(C) Although contemporary societies rely heavily on the knowledge of experts, 
access to popular literature makes contemporary societies less dependent on 
experts for information about rules of behavior than were ancient societies.  
(D) While only some members of the elite can become experts, popular literature 
gives the majority in contemporary society an opportunity to become 
members of such an elite.  
(E) Access to popular literature distinguishes ancient from contemporary societies 
because it relies on a level of educational achievement attainable only be a 
contemporary elite.  
17. According to the passage, each of the following statements concerning ancie nt 
Greek juries is true EXCEPT:  
(A) They were somewhat democratic insofar as they were composed largely of 
people f rom the lowest social classes.  
(B) They were exposed to the law only insofar as they heard relevant statutes read 
out during legal proceeding s. 
(C) They ascertained the facts of a case and interpreted the laws.  
(D) They did not have direct access to important books and documents that were 786 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 available to the elite.  
(E) They rendered verdicts without benefit of private discussion among 
themselve s. 
18. The author characterizes the Greek tradition of the law -giver (line 21) as an 
effect mythologizing most probably in order to  
(A) illustrate the ancient Greek tendency to memorialize historical events by 
transforming them into myths  
(B) convey the historical importance of the development of the early Athenian 
written law code  
(C) convey the high regard in which the Athenians held their legal tradition  
(D) suggest that the development of a written law code was not primarily 
responsible for diminishin g the power of the Athenian aristocracy  
(E) suggest that the Greek tradition of the law -giver should be understood in 
the larger context of Greek mythology  
19. The author draws an analogy between the Latin Bible and an early law code 
(lines 49 -51) in order to make which one of the following points?  
(A) Documents were considered authoritative in premodern society in proportion 
to their inaccessibility to the majority.  
(B) Documents that were perceived as highly influential in premodern societies 
were no t necessarily accessible to the societys majority.  
(C) What is most revered in a nondemocratic society is what is most frequently 
misunderstood.  
(D) Political documents in premodern societies exerted a social influence similar 
to that exerted by religious  documents.  
(E) Political documents in premodern societies were inaccessible to the majority 
of the population because of the language in which they were written.  
20. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) argue that a particular method of observi ng contemporary societies is 
inconsistent  
(B) point out the weaknesses in a particular approach to understanding ancient 
societies  
(C) present the disadvantages of a particular approach to understanding the 
relationship between ancient and contemporary soc ieties  
(D) examine the importance of developing an appropriate method for 
understanding ancient societies  
(E) convey the difficulty of accurately understanding attitudes in ancient societies  
The English who in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries inhabited those colonies that 
would later become the United States shared a common political vocabulary wit h the English in 
England. Steeped  as they were in the English political language , these colonials failed to  LSAT  787 
 observe that their experience in America had given the words a significance quite different from 
that accepted by the English with whom they debated ; in fact, they claimed that they were 
more loyal to the English political tradition than were the English in England.  
In many respects the political institutions of England were reproduced in these American 
colonies. By the middle of eighteenth century, all of these colonies except four were headed by 
Royal Governors appointed by the King and perceived as bearing a relation to the people of the 
colony similar to that of the King to the English people . Moreover, each of these colonies 
enjoyed a representati ve assembly, which was consciously modeled , in powers and practices, 
after the English Parliament. In both England and these colonies, only property holders could 
vote. 
Nevertheless, though English and colonial institutions were structurally similar, attit udes 
toward those institutions differed. For example, English legal development from the early 
seventeenth century had been moving steadily toward the absolute power of Parliament. The 
most unmistakable sign of this tendency was the legal assertion that th e King was subject to 
the law. Together with this resolute denial of the absolute right of kings went the assertion that  
Parliament was unlimited in its power: it could change even the Constitution by its ordinary acts 
of legislation. By the eighteenth cen tury the English had accepted the idea that the 
parliamentary representatives of the people were omnipotent.  
The citizens of these colonies did not look upon the English Parliament with such fond eyes, 
nor did they concede that their own assemblies possess ed such wide powers. There were good 
historical reasons for this. To the English the word constitution meant the whole body of law 
and legal custom formulated since the beginning of the kingdom, whereas to these colonials a 
constitution was a specific wr itten document, enumerating specific powers. This distinction in 
meaning can be traced to the fact that the foundations of government in the various colonies 
were written charters granted by the Crown. These express  authorizations to govern were 
tangible, definite things. Over the years these colonial had often repaired to the charters to 
justify themselves in the struggle against tyrannical governors or officials of the Crown. More 
than a century of government under written constitutions convinced th ese colonists of the 
necessity for  and efficacy of  protecting their liberties against governmental encroachment by 
explicitly defining all governmental powers in a document.  
21. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Th e colonials and the English mistakenly thought that they shared a common 
political vocabulary.  
(B) The colonials and the English shared a variety of institutions.  
(C) The colonials and the English had conflicting interpretations of the language 
and institu tional structures that they shared.  
(D) Colonial attitudes toward English institutions grew increasingly hostile in the 
eighteenth century.  
(E) Seventeenth -century English legal development accounted for colonial 
attitudes toward constitutions.  
22. The passage supports all of the following statements about the political 
conditions present by the middle of the eighteenth century in the Amer ican 788 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 colonies discussed in the passage EXCEPT:  
(A) Colonials who did not own property could not vote.  
(B) All of these colonies had representative assemblies modeled after the British 
Parliament.  
(C) Some of these colonies had Royal Governors.  
(D) Royal Go vernors could be removed from office by colonial assemblies.  
(E) In these colonies, Royal Governors were regarded as serving a function like 
that of a king.  
23. The passage implies which one of the following about English kings prior to the 
early seventeenth century?  
(A) They were the source of all law.  
(B) They  frequently flouted laws made by Parliament.  
(C) Their power relative to that of Parliament was considerably greater than it 
was in the eighteenth century.  
(D) They were more often the sources of legal reform than they were in the 
eighteenth century.  
(E) The y had to combat those who believed that the power of Parliament was 
absolute.  
24. The author mentions which one of the following as evidence for the 
eighteenth -century English attitude toward Parliament?  
(A) The English had become uncomfortable with i nstitutions that could claim 
absolute authority.  
(B) The English realized that their interests were better guarded by Parliament 
than by the King.  
(C) The English allowed Parliament to make constitutional changes by legislative 
enactment.  
(D) The English f elt that the King did not possess the knowledge that could 
enable him to rule responsibly.  
(E) The English had decided that it was time to reform their representative 
government.  
25. The passage implies that the colonials discussed in the passage would have 
considered which one of the following to be a source of their debates with 
England?  
(A) their changed use of the English political vocabulary  
(B) English commitment to parliamentary representation  
(C) their uniquely English experience  
(D) their refusa l to adopt any English political institutions  
(E) their greater loyalty to the English political traditions   LSAT  789 
 26. According to the passage, the English attitude toward the English Constitution 
differed from the colonial attitude toward constitutions in that the English 
regarded their Constitution as  
(A) the legal foundation of the kingdom  
(B) a document containing a collection of customs  
(C) a cumulative corpus of legislation and legal traditions  
(D) a record alterable by royal authority  
(E) an unchangeable body of governmental powers  
27. The prim ary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) expose the misunderstanding that has characterized descriptions of the 
relationship between seventeenth and eighteenth -century England and 
certain of its American colonies  
(B) suggest a reason for Englands treatment of  certain of its American colonies 
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries  
(C) settle an ongoing debate about the relationship between England and certain 
of its American colonies in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries  
(D) interpret the events lead ing up to the independence of certain of Englands 
American colonies in the eighteenth century  
(E) explain an aspect of the relationship between England and certain of its 
American colonies in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries  
LSAT   11    SECTIO N III  
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivab ly answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
Oil companies needs offshore platforms primarily b ecause the oil or natural gas the 
companies extract from the ocean floor has to be processed before pumps can be used to move 
the substances ashore. But because processing crude  (unprocessed oil or gas) on a platform 
rather than at facilities onshore expos es workers to the risks of explosion and to an 
unpredictable environment, researchers are attempting to diminish the need for human labor 
on platforms and even to eliminate platforms altogether by redesigning two kinds of pumps to 
handle crude. These pumps  could then be used to boost the natural pressure driving the flow of 
crude, which, by itself, is sufficient only to bring the crude to the platform, located just above 
the wellhead. Currently, pumps that could boost this natural pressure sufficiently to d rive the 
crude through a pipeline to the shore do not work consistently because of the crudes content. 
Crude may consist of oil or natural gas in multiphase states combinations of liquids, gases, 
and solids under pressure that do not reach the wellhead in  constant proportions. The flow of 
crude oil, for example, can change quickly from 60 percent liquid to 70 percent gas. This surge 790 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 in gas content causes loss of head, or pressure inside a pump, with the result that a pump can 
no longer impart enough ener gy to transport the crude mixture through the pipeline and to the 
shore.  
Of two pumps being redesigned, the positive -displacement pump is promising because it is 
immune to sudden shifts in the proportion of liquid to gas in the crude mixture. But the pump s 
design, which consists of a single or twin screw pushing the fluid from one end of the pump to 
the other, brings crude into close contact with most parts of the pump, and thus requires that it 
be made of expensive, corrosion -resistant material. The alter native is the centrifugal pump, 
which has a rotating impeller that sucks fluid in at one end and forces fluid out at the other. 
Although this pump has a proven design and has worked for years with little maintenance in 
waste -disposal plants, researchers ha ve discovered that because the swirl of its impeller 
separates gas out from the oil that normally accompanies it, significant reductions in head can 
occur as it operates.  
Research in the development of these pumps is focused mainly on trying to reduce the cost 
of the positive -displacement pump and attempting to make the centrifugal pump more tolerant 
of gas. Other researchers are looking at ways of adapting either kind of pump for use 
underwater, so that crude could be moved directly from the sea bottom to processing facilities 
onshore, eliminating platforms.  
1. Which one of following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Oil companies are experimenting with technologies that may help diminish 
the danger to workers from offshore crude processing.  
(B) Oil companies are seeking methods of installing processing facilities 
underwater.  
(C) Researchers are developing several new pumps designed to enhance human 
labor efficiency in processing facilities.  
(D) Researchers are seeking to develop equipment tha t would preempt  the need 
for processing facilities onshore.  
(E) Researchers are seeking ways to separate liquids from gases in crude in order 
to enable safer  processing.  
2. The passage supports which one of the following statements about the natural 
pressure driving the flow of crude?  
(A) It is higher than that created by the centrifugal pump.  
(B) It is constant regardless of relative proportions of gas and li quid.  
(C) It is able to carry the crude only as far as the wellhead.  
(D) It is able to carry the crude to the platform.  
(E) It is able to carry the crude to the shore.  
3. Which one of the following best describes the relationship of the second 
paragraph to the passage as a whole?  
(A) It offers concrete detail designed to show that the argument made in the first 
paragrap h is flawed.   LSAT  791 
 (B) It provides detail that expands upon the information presented in the first 
paragraph.  
(C) It enhances the authors discussion by objectively presenting in detail the pros 
and cons of a claim made in the first paragraph.  
(D) It detracts fr om the authors discussion by presenting various problems that 
qualify the goals presented.  
(E) It modifies an observation made in the first paragraph by detailing viewpoints 
against it.  
4. Which one of the following phrases, if substituted for the word head in line 47, 
would LEAST change the meaning of the sentence?  
(A) the flow of the cru de inside the pump  
(B) the volume of oil inside the pump  
(C) the volume of gas inside the pump  
(D) the speed of the impeller moving the crude  
(E) the pressure inside of the pump  
5. With which one of the following statements regarding offshore platforms would 
the author most likely agree?  
(A) If a reduction of human labor on offshore platform is achieved, there is no 
real need to eliminate platforms altogether.  
(B) Reducing human labor on offshore platforms is desirable because researchers 
knowledge abou t the transportation of crude is dangerously incomplete.  
(C) The dangers involved in working on offshore platforms make their 
elimination a desirable goal.  
(D) The positive -displacement pump is the better alternative for researchers, 
because it would allow  them to eliminate platforms altogether.  
(E) Though researchers have succeeded in reducing human labor on offshore 
platforms, they think that it would be inadvisable to eliminate platforms 
altogether, because these platforms have other uses.  
6. Which on e of the following can be inferred from the passage about pumps that 
are currently available to boost the natural pressure of crude?  
(A) The efficiency of these pumps depends on there being no gas in the flow of 
crude.  
(B) These pumps are more efficient wh en the crude is less subject to sudden 
increases in the proportion of gas to liquid.  
(C) A sudden change from solid to liquid in the flow of crude increases the 
efficiency of these pumps.  
(D) The proportion of liquid to gas in the flow of crude does not af fect the 
efficiency of these pumps.  
(E) A sudden change from liquid to gas in the flow of crude increases the risk of 792 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 explosion due to rising pressure inside these pumps.  
7. The passage implies that the positive -displacement pump differs from the 
centri fugal pump in that the positive -displacement pump  
(A) is more promising, but it also is more expensive and demands more 
maintenance  
(B) is especially well research, since it has been used in other settings  
(C) involves the use of a single or twin screw tha t sucks fluid in at one end of the 
pump  
(D) is problematic because it cause rapid shifts from liquid to gas content in crude  
(E) involves exposure of many parts of the pump to crude  
8. The passage implies that the current state of technology necessitates that crude be 
moved to shore  
(A) in a multiphase state  
(B) in equal proportions of gas to liquid  
(C) with small proportion s of corrosive material  
(D) after having been processed  
(E) largely in the form of a liquid  
To critics accustomed to the style of fifteenth -century narrative paintings by Italian artists 
from Tuscany, the Venetian examples of narrative paintings with re ligious subjects that Patricia 
Fortini Brown analyzes in a recent book will come as a great surprise. While the Tuscan 
paintings present large -scale figures, clear narratives, and simple settings, the Venetians filled 
their pictures with dozens of small fi gures and elaborate building, in addition to a wealth of 
carefully observed anecdotal detail often irrelevant to the paintings principal subjects the 
religious stories they narrate. Although it occasionally obscured these stories, this accumulation 
of circumstantial detail from Venetian life the inclusion of prominent Venetian citizens, for 
example was considered appropriate to the narration of historical subjects and underlined the 
authenticity of the historical events depicted. Indeed, Brown argues that the distinctive style of 
the Venetian paintings what she calls the eyewitness style was influenced by Venetian 
affinity for a strongly parochial type of historical writing, consisting almost exclusively of 
vernacular chronicles of local events embroidere d with all kinds of inconsequential detail.  
And yet, while Venetian attitudes toward history that are reflected in their art account in 
part for the difference in style between Venetian and Tuscan narrative paintings , Brown has 
overlooked some practical in fluences, such as climate. Tuscan churches are filled with frescoes 
that, in contrast to Venetian narrative paintings, consist mainly of large figures and easily 
recognized religious stories, as one would expect of paintings that are normally viewed from a  
distance and are designed primarily to remind the faithful of their religious tenets. In Venice, 
where the damp climate is unsuited to  fresco, narrative frescoes in churches were almost 
nonexistent, with the result that Venetian artists and their public h ad no practical experience of 
the large -scale representation of familiar religious stories. Their model for painted stories was 
the cycle of secular historical paintings in the Venetian magistrates palace, which were indeed 
the counterpart of written history and were made all the more authoritative by a proliferation of  LSAT  793 
 circumstantial detail.  
Moreover, because pa inting frescoes requires an unusually sure hand, particularly in the 
representation of human form, the development of drawing skill was central to artistic training 
in Tuscany, and by  1500 the public there tended to distinguish artists on the basis of how well 
they could draw human figures. In Venice, a city virtually without frescoes, this kind of skill was 
acquired and appreciated much later. Gentile Bellini, for example, although regarded as one of 
the supreme painters of the day, was feeble at drawing . On the other hand, the emphasis on 
architecture so evident in the Venetian narrative paintings was something that local painters 
obviously prized, largely because painting architecture in perspective was seen as a particular 
test of the Venetian painters skill. 
9. Which one of the following best states the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Tuscan painters use of fresco explains the prominence of human figures in 
the narrative paintings that they produced during the fifteenth century.  
(B) In addition to fiftee nth-century Venetian attitudes toward history, other factors 
may help to explain the characteristic features of Venetian narrative 
paintings with religious subjects produced during that period.  
(C) The inclusion of authentic detail from Venetian life disti nguished 
fifteenth -century Venetian narrative paintings from those that were produced 
in Tuscany.  
(D) Venetian painters were generally more skilled at painting buildings than 
Tuscan painters were at drawing human forms.  
(E) The cycle of secular historical paintings in the Venetian magistrates palace 
was the primary narrative paintings with religious subjects.  
10. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) Pointing out the superiority of one painting s tyle over another.  
(B) Citing evidence that requires a reevaluation of a conventionally held view.  
(C) Discussing factors that explain a difference in painting styles.  
(D) Outlining the strengths and weaknesses of two opposing views regarding the 
evolution  of a painting style.  
(E) Arguing for the irrelevance of one theory and for its replacement by a more 
plausible alternative.  
11. As it is described in the passage, Browns explanation of the use of the 
eyewitness style in Venetian narrative painting suggests that  
(A) The pa inting of architecture in perspective requires greater drawing skill than 
does the representation of a human form in a fresco.  
(B) Certain characteristics of a style of painting can reflect a style of historical 
writing that was common during the same peri od. 
(C) The eyewitness style in Venetian narrative paintings with religious subjects 
was largely the result of the influence of Tuscan artists who worked 
primarily in fresco.  794 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (D) The historical detail in Venetian narrative paintings with religious subjects  
can be traced primarily to the influence of the paintings in the Venetian 
magistrates palace.  
(E) A style of painting can be dramatically transformed by a sudden influx of 
artists from another region.  
12. The author suggests that fifteenth -century Ven etian narrative paintings with 
religious subjects were painted by artists who  
(A) were able to draw human figures with more skill after they were apprenticed 
to painters in Tuscany  
(B) assumed that their paintings would typically be viewed from a distance  
(C) were a major influence on the artists who produced the cycle of historical 
paintings in the Venetian magistrates palace  
(D) were reluctant to paint frescoes primarily because they lacked the drawing 
skill that painting frescoes required  
(E) were better at painting architecture in perspective than they were at drawing 
human figures  
13. The author implies that Venetian narrative paintings with religious subjects 
included the representation of elaborate buildings in part because  
(A) the ability to paint architecture in perspective was seen in Venice as proof of a 
painters skill  
(B) the subjects of such paintings were often religious stories  
(C) large frescoes were especially conducive to representing architecture in 
perspective  
(D) the architecture of Venice in the fifteenth century was more elaborate than 
was the architecture of Tuscany  
(E) the paintings were imitations of a kind of historical writing that was popular 
in Tuscany  
14. Which one of the following, if true, would most weaken the authors contention 
that fifteenth -century Venetian artists had no practical experience of the  
large -scale representation of familiar religious stories (line 40 -42)? 
(A) The style of secular historical paintings in the palace of the Venetian 
magistrate was similar to that of Venetian narrative paintings with religious 
subjects.  
(B) The style of th e historical writing produced by fifteenth -century Venetian 
authors was similar in its inclusion of anecdotal details to secular paintings 
produced during that century in Tuscany.  
(C) Many of the artists who produced Venetian narrative paintings with relig ious 
subjects served as apprentices in Tuscany, where they had become familiar 
with the technique of painting of frescoes.  
(D) Few of the frescoes painted in Tuscany during the fifteenth century had  LSAT  795 
 secular subjects, and those that did often betrayed the a rtists inability to 
represent elaborate architecture in perspective.  
(E) Few of the Venetian narrative paintings produced toward the end of the 
fifteenth century show evidence of the enhanced drawing skill that 
characterized the paintings produced in Venice a century later.  
Currently, legal scholars agree that in some c ases legal rules do not specify a definite 
outcome. These scholars believe that such indeterminacy results from the vagueness of 
language: the boundaries of the application of a term are often unclear. Nevertheless, they 
maintain that the system of legal r ules by and large rests on clear core meanings that do 
determine definite outcomes for most cases. Contrary to this view, an earlier group of legal 
philosophers, called realists, argued that indeterminacy pervades every part of the law.  
The realists held  that there is always a cluster of rules relevant to the decision in any 
litigated case. For example, deciding whether an aunts promise to pay her niece a sum of 
money if she refrained from smoking is enforceable would involve a number of rules regarding 
such issues as offer, acceptance, and revocation. Linguistic vagueness in any one of these rules 
would affect the outcome of the case, making possible multiple points of indeterminacy, not 
just one or two, in any legal case.  
For the realists, an even more damaging kind of indeterminacy stems from  the fact that in 
a common -law system based on precedent , a judges decision is held to be binding on judges in 
subsequent similar cases. Judicial decisions are expressed in written opinions, commonly held 
to consis t of two parts: the holding (the decision for or against the plaintiff and the essential 
grounds or legal reasons for it, that is, what subsequent judges are bound by), and the dicta 
(everything in an opinion not essential to the decision, for example, com ments about points of 
law not treated as the basis of the outcome). The realists argued that in practice the 
common -law system treats the holding/dicta distinction loosely. They pointed out that even 
when the judge writing an opinion characterizes part o f it as the holding, judges writing 
subsequent opinions, although unlikely to dispute the decision itself, are not bound by the 
original judges perception of what was essential to the decision. Later judges have tremendous 
leeway in being able to redefi ne the holding and the dicta in a precedential case. This leeway 
enables judges to choose which rules of law formed the basis of the decision in the earlier case. 
When judging almost any case, then, a judge can find a relevant precedential case which, in 
subsequent opinions, has been read by one judge as stating one legal rule, and by another 
judge as stating another, possibly contradictory one. A judge thus faces an indeterminate legal 
situation in which he or she has to choose which rules are to govern th e case at hand.  
15. According to the passage, the realists argued that which one of the following is 
true of a common -law system?  
(A) It gives rise to numerous situations in which the decisions of earlier judges 
are found to be in error by later judges.  
(B) It possesses a clear set of legal rules in theory, but in practice most judges are 
unaware of the strict meaning of those rules.  
(C) Its strength lies in the requirement that judges decide cases according to 
precedent rather than according to a set of ab stract principles.  796 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (D) It would be improved if judges refrained from willfully misinterpreting the 
written opinions of prior judges.  
(E) It treats the difference between the holding and the dicta in a written opinion 
rather loosely in practice.  
16. Acco rding to the passage, which one of the following best describes the 
relationship between a judicial holding and a judicial decision?  
(A) The holding is not commonly considered binding on subsequent judges, but 
the decision is.  
(B) The holding formally stat es the outcome of the case, while the decision 
explains it.  
(C) The holding explains the decision but does not include it.  
(D) The holding consists of the decision and the dicta.  
(E) The holding sets forth and justifies a decision.  
17. The information in the passage suggests that the realists would most likely have 
agreed with which one of the following statements about the reaction of judges to 
past interpretations of a preced ential case, each of which states a different legal 
rule?  
(A) The judges would most likely disagree with one or more of the interpretations 
and overturn the earlier judges decisions.  
(B) The judges might differ from each other concerning which of the 
interpretations would apply in a given case.  
(C) The judges probably would consider themselves bound by all the legal rules 
stated in the interpretations.  
(D) The judges would regard the lack of unanimity among interpretations as 
evidence that no precedents ex isted.  
(E) The judges would point out in their holdings the inherent contradictions 
arising from the earlier judges differing interpretations.  
18. It can be inferred from the passage that most legal scholars today would agree 
with the realists that  
(A) Linguistic vagueness can cause indeterminacy regarding the outcome of a 
litigated case.  
(B) In any litigated case, several different and possibly contradictory legal rules 
are relevant to the decision of the case.  
(C) The distinction between holding and d icta in a written opinion is usually 
difficult to determine in practice.  
(D) The boundaries of applicability of terms may sometimes be difficult to 
determine, but the core meanings of the terms are well established.  
(E) A common -law system gives judges tremendous leeway in interpreting 
precedents, and contradictor readings of precedential cases can usually be 
found.   LSAT  797 
 19. The passage suggests that the realists believed which one of the following to be 
true of the di cta in a judges written opinion?  
(A) The judge writing the opinion is usually careful to specify those parts of the 
opinion he or she considers part of the dicta.  
(B) The appropriateness of the judges decision would be disputed by subsequent 
judges on th e basis of legal rules expressed in the dicta.  
(C) A consensus concerning what constitutes the dicta in a judges opinion comes 
to be fixed over time as subsequent similar cases are decided.  
(D) Subsequent judges can consider parts of what the original jud ge saw as the 
dicta to be essential to the original opinion.  
(E) The judges decision and the grounds for it are usually easily distinguishable 
from the dicta.  
20. Which one of the following best describes the overall organization of the 
passage?  
(A) A traditional point of view is explained and problems arising from it are 
described.  
(B) Two conflicting systems of thought are compared point for point and then 
evaluated.  
(C) A legal concept is defined and arguments justifying that definition are refuted.  
(D) Two viewpoints on an issue are briefly described and one of those viewpoints 
is discussed at greater length.  
(E) A theoretical description of how a system develops is contrasted with the 
actual practices characterizing the system.  
21. Which one of the following titles best reflects the content of the passage?  
(A) Legal Indeterminacy: The Debate Continues  
(B) Holding Versus Dicta: A Distinction Without a Difference  
(C) Linguistic Vagueness: Is It Circumscribed in Legal Terminology?  
(D) Legal Indeterminacy: The Realists View of Its Scope  
(E) Legal Rules and the Precedential System: How Judges Interpret the 
Precedents  
Years after the movement to obtain civil rights for black people in the United States made 
its most important gains, scholars are reaching for a theoretical perspective capable of 
clarifying its momentous developments. New theories of social move ments are being discussed, 
not just among social psychologists, but also among political theorists.  
Of the many competing formulations of the classical social psychological theory of social 
movement, three are prominent in the literature on the civil rig hts movement: rising 
expectations, relative deprivation, and J -curve. Each conforms to a causal sequence 
characteristic of classical social movement theory, linking some unusual condition, or system 
strain, to the generation of unrest. When these v ersions of the classical theory are applied to 
the civil rights movement , the source of strain is identified as a change in black socioeconomic 798 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 status that occurred shortly before the widespread protest activity of the movement.  
For example, the theory of rising expectations asserts that protest activity was a response 
to psychological tensions generated by gains experienced immediately prior to the civil rights 
movement. Advancement did not satisfy ambition, but cr eated the desire for further 
advancement. Only slightly different is the theory of relative deprivation. Here the impetus to 
protest is identified as gains achieved during the premovement period, coupled with  
simultaneous failure to make any appreciable headway relative to the dominant group. The 
J-curve theory argues that the movement occurred because a prolonged period of rising 
expectations and gratification was followed by a sharp reversal.  
Political theorists have been dismissive of these applications of classical theory to the civil 
rights movement. Their arguments rest on  the conviction that, implicitly, the classical theory 
trivializes the political ends of movement pa rticipants, focusing rather on presumed 
psychological dysfunctions: reduction of complex social situations to simple paradigms of 
stimulus and response obviates the relevance of all but the shortest -term analysis. Furthermore, 
the theories lack predictive value: strain is always present to some degree, but social 
movement is not. How can we know which strain will provoke upheaval?  
These very legitimate complaints having frequently been made, it remains to find a means 
of testing the strength of the theori es. Problematically, while proponents of the various theories 
have contradictor y interpretations of socioeconomic conditions leading to the civil rights 
movement, examination of various statistical records regarding the material status of black 
Americans y ields ample evidence to support any of the three theories. The steady rise in 
median black family income supports the rising expectations hypothesis ; the stability of the 
economic position of black vis- -vis white Americans lends credence to the relative deprivation 
interpretation ; unemployment data are consistent with the J -curve theory. A better test is the 
comparison of each of these economic indicators with the frequency of move ment-initiated 
events reported in the press; unsurprisingly, none correlates significantly with the pace of 
reports about movement activity.  
22. It can be inferred from the passage that the classical theory of social movement 
would not be appropriately app lied to an annual general election because such an 
election  
(A) may focus on personalities rather than on political issues  
(B) is not provoked primarily by an unusual condition  
(C) may be decided according to the psychological needs of voters  
(D) may not e ntail momentous developments  
(E) actually entails two or more distinct social movements  
23. According to the passage, the rising expectations and relative deprivation 
models differ in which one of the following ways?  
(A) They predict different respo nses to the same socioeconomic conditions.  
(B) They disagree about the relevance of psychological explanations for protest 
movements.  
(C) They are meant to explain different kinds of social change.   LSAT  799 
 (D) They describe the motivation of protesters in slightly  different ways.  
(E) They disagree about the relevance of socioeconomic status to system strain.  
24. The author implies that political theorists a ttribute which one of the following 
assumptions to social psychologists who apply the classical theory of social 
movements to the civil rights movement?  
(A) Participants in any given social movement have conflicting motivations.  
(B) Social movements are ultimately beneficial to society.  
(C) Only strain of a socioeconomic nature can provoke a social movement.  
(D) The political ends of movement participants are best analyzed in terms of 
participants psychological motivations.  
(E) Psychological motivations of movement participants better  illuminate the 
causes of social movements than do participants political motivations.  
25. Which one of the following statements is supported by the results of the better 
test discussed in  the last paragraph of the passage?  
(A) The test confirms the three classical theories discussed in the passage.  
(B) The test provides no basis for deciding among the three classical theories 
discussed in the passage.  
(C) The test shows that it is impossib le to apply any theory of social movements 
to the civil rights movement.  
(D) The test indicates that press coverage of the civil rights movement was 
biased.  
(E) The test verifies that the civil rights movement generated socioeconomic 
progress.  
26. The validity of the better test (line 65) as proposed by the author might be 
undermined by the fact that  
(A) the press is selective about the movement activiti es it chooses to cover  
(B) not all economic indicators receive the same amount of press coverage  
(C) economic indicators often contradict one another  
(D) a movement -initiated event may not correlate significantly with any of the 
three economic indicators  
(E) the pace of movement -initiated events is difficult to anticipate  
27. The main purpose of the passage is to  
(A) Persuade historians of the indispensability of a theoretical framework for 
understanding recent history.  
(B) Present a new model of social movement.  
(C) Account for a shift in a theoretical debate.  
(D) Show the unity underlying the diverse classical models of social movement.  
(E) Discuss the reasoning behind and shortcomings of certain social 800 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 psychological theories.  
LSAT   12    SECTION II I 
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably a nswer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
Nearly every writer on the philosophy of civil rights activist Martin Luther King, Jr., makes a 
connection between King and Henry David Thoreau, usually via Thoreaus famous essay, Civil 
Disobedience (1849). In his book Stride Toward Freedom (1958), King himself stated that 
Thoreaus essay was his first int ellectual contact with the theory of passive resistance to 
governmental laws that are perceived as morally unjust. However, this emphasis on Thoreaus 
influence on King is unfortunate: first , King would not have agreed with many other aspects of 
Thoreaus philosophy, including Thoreaus ultimate acceptance of violence as a form of protest; 
second, an overemphasis on the influence of one essay has kept historians from noting other 
correspondences between Kings philosophy and transcendentalism . Civil Disobedience was 
the only example of transcendentalist writing with which King was familiar, and in many other 
transcendentalist writings , including works by Ralph Waldo Emerson and Margaret Fuller, King 
would have found ideas more nearly akin to his own.  
The kind of civil disobedience King had in mind was, in fact , quite different from Thoreaus 
view of civil disobedience . Thoreau, like most other transcendentalists, was primarily interested 
in reform of the individual, whereas King was primarily interested in reform of society. As a 
protest against the Mexican War, Thoreau refused to pay taxes, but he did not hope by his 
action to force a change in national policy. While he encouraged others to adopt similar protests, 
he did not attempt to mount any mass protest action against unjust laws. In contrast to 
Thoreau, King began to advocate the use of mass civil  disobedience to effect revolutionary 
changes within the social system.  
However, Kings writings suggest that, without realizing it, he was an incipient 
transcendentalist. Most transcendentalists subscribed to the concept of higher law and 
included civil  disobedience  to unjust laws as part of their strategy. They often invoked the 
concept of higher law to justify their opposition to slavery and to advocate disobedience to the 
strengthened Fugitive Slave Law of 1850. In his second major book, Kings discus sion of just 
and unjust laws and the responsibility of the individual is very similar to the transcendentalists 
discussion of higher law . In reference to how one can advocate breaking some laws and 
obeying others, King notes that there are two types of la ws, just and unjust; he describes a just 
law as a code that squares with  the moral law  and an unjust law as a code that is out of 
harmony with the moral law. Thus , Kings opposition to the injustice of l egalized segregation in 
the twentieth century is philosophically akin to the transcendentalists opposition to the Fugitive 
Slave Law in the nineteenth century.  
1. Which one of the following best states the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Kings philosophy w as more influenced by Thoreaus essay on civil  LSAT  801 
 disobedience than by any other writing of the transcendentalists.  
(B) While historians may have overestimated Thoreaus influence on King, King 
was greatly influenced by a number of the transcendentalist philo sophers.  
(C) Thoreaus and Kings views on civil disobedience differed in that King was 
more concerned with the social reform than with the economic reform of 
society.  
(D) Although historians have overemphasized Thoreaus influence on King, there 
are paral lels between Kings philosophy and transcendentalism that have not 
been fully appreciated.  
(E) Kings ideas about law and civil disobedience were influenced by 
transcendentalism in general and Thoreaus essays in particular.  
2. Which one of the following statements about Civil Disobedience would the 
author consider most accurate?  
(A) It wa s not Kings first contact with the concept of passive resistance to unjust 
laws.  
(B) It was one of many examples of transcendentalist writing with which King 
was familiar.  
(C) It provided King with a model for using passive resistance to effect social 
change. 
(D) It contains a number of ideas with which other transcendentalists strongly 
disagreed.  
(E) It influenced Kings philosophy on passive resistance to unjust laws.  
3. In the first paragraph, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) chronicling the development of Kings philosophy on passive resistance to 
unjust law  
(B) suggesting that a c ommon emphasis on one influence on Kings philosophy 
has been misleading  
(C) providing new information about the influence of twentieth -century 
philosophers on Kings work  
(D) summarizing the work of historians o f the most important influences on 
Kings ph ilosophy  
(E) providing background information about nineteenth -century transcendentalist 
philosophers  
4. According to the passage, which one of the following is true of Emerson and 
Fuller?  
(A) Some of their ideas were less typical of transcendentalism than wer e some of 
Thoreaus ideas . 
(B) They were more concerned with the reform of society than with the reform of 
the individual.  802 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (C) They would have been more likely than Thoreau to agree with King on the 
necessity of mass protest in civil disobedience.  
(D) Thei r ideas about civil disobedience and unjust laws are as well known as 
Thoreaus are.  
(E) Some of their ideas were more similar to Kings than were some of Thoreaus.  
5. According to the passage , King differed from most transcendentalists in that he  
(A) opposed violence as a form of civil protest  
(B) opposed war as an instrument of fore ign policy under any circumstances  
(C) believed that just laws had an inherent moral value  
(D) was more interested in reforming society than in reforming the individual  
(E) protested social and legal injustice in United States society rather than United  
States foreign policy  
6. The passage suggests which one of the following about Thoreau?  
(A) He was the first to develop fully the theory of civil disobedience.  
(B) His work has had a greater influence on contemporary thinkers than has the 
work of Emerson and Fuller.  
(C) His philosophy does not contain all of the same elements as the philosophies 
of the other transcendentalists.  
(D) He advocated using civil disobedience to force the federal government to 
change its policies on war.  
(E) He is better known for his ideas on social and legal reform than for his ideas 
on individual reform.  
7. The passage provides support for which one of the following statements about the 
quotations in lines 52 -55? 
(A) They are an example of a way in which Kings ideas differed from Thoreaus 
but were similar to the ideas of other transcendentalists.  
(B) They provide evidence that proves that Kings philosophy was affected by 
transcendentalist thought.  
(C) They suggest that King, like the transcendenta lists, judged human laws by 
ethical standards.  
(D) They suggest a theoretical basis for Kings philosophy of government.  
(E) They provide a paraphrase of Thoreaus position on just and unjust laws.  
In Democracies and its Critics, Robert Dahl defend s both democratic value and pluralist 
democracies, or polyarchies (a rough shorthand term for Western political systems). Dah l 
argues convincingly that the idea of democracy rests on political equality the equality capacity 
of all citizens to determine or influence collective decisions. Of course, as Dahl recognizes, if 
hierarchical ordering is inevitable in any structure of gov ernment, and if no society can 
guarantee perfect equality  in the resources that may give rise to political influence, the 
democratic principle of political equality is incapable of full realization. So actual systems can be  LSAT  803 
 deemed democratic only as approx imations to the ideal.  It is on these grounds that Dahl 
defends polyarchy.  
As a representative system in which elected officials both determine government policy 
and are accountable to a broad -based electorate, polyarchy reinforces a diffusion of power 
away from any single center and toward a variety of individuals, groups, and organizations. It is 
this centrifugal characteristic, Dahl argues, that makes polyarchy the nearest possible 
approximation to the democratic ideal. Polyarchy achieves this diffusion of power through party 
competition and the operation of pressure groups. Competing for votes, parties seek to offer 
different sections of the electorate what they most want; they do not ask what the majority 
thinks of an issue, but what policy commitments will sway the electoral decisions of particular 
groups. Equally, groups that have strong feelings about an issue can organize in pressure 
groups to influence public policy . 
During the 1960s and 1970s, criticism of the theory of pluralist democracy was vigorous. 
Many critics pointed to a gap between the model and the reality of Western political systems. 
They argued that the distribution of power resources other than the vote was so uneven that 
the political order systematically gave added weight to those who were already richer or 
organizationally more powerful. So the power of some groups to exclude issues altogether from 
the political agenda effectively countered an y diffusion of influence on decision -making.  
Although such criticism became subdued during the 1980s, Dahl himself seems to support 
some of the earlier criticism. Although he regrets that some Western intellectuals demand more 
democracy from polyarchies th an is possible, and is cautious about the possibility of further 
democratization, he nevertheless ends his book by asking what changes in structures and 
consciousness might make political life more democratic in present polyarchies. One answer, he 
suggests , is to look at the economic order of polyarchies from the point of view of the citizen as 
well as from that of producers and consumers. This would require a critical examination of both 
the distribution of those economic resources that are at the same tim e political resources, and 
the relationship between political structures and economic enterprises.  
8. The characterization of polyarchies as centrifugal (line 22) emphasizes the  
(A) way in which political power is decentralized in a polyarchy  
(B) central  role of power resources in a polyarchy  
(C) kind of concentrated power that political parties generate in a polyarchy  
(D) dynamic balance that exists between economic enterprises and elected 
officials in a polyarchy  
(E) dynamic balance that exists between voters and elected officials in a 
polyarchy  
9. In the third paragraph, the author of the passage refers to criticism of the theory 
of polyarchy democracy primarily in order to  
(A) refute Dahls statement that Wes tern intellectuals expect more democracy 
from polyarchies than is possible  
(B) advocate the need for rethinking the basic principles on which the theory of 
democracy rests  804 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (C) suggest that the structure of government within pluralist democracies should 
be changed  
(D) point out a flaw in Dahls argument that the principle of political equality 
cannot be fully realized  
(E) point out an objection to Dahls defense of polyarchy  
10. According to the passage, the aim of a political party in a polyarchy is to do 
which one of the following?  
(A) determine what the position of the majority of voters is on a particular issue  
(B) determine what position on an issue will earn the support of particular groups 
of voters  
(C) organize voters into pressure groups in order to influence public policy on a 
particular issue  
(D) ensure that elected officials accurately represent the posit ion of the party on 
specific issue  
(E) ensure that elected officials accurately represent the position of the electorate 
on specific issues  
11. It can be inferred from the passage that Dahl assumes which one of the following 
in his defense of polyarchies?  
(A) Polyarchies are limited in the extent to which they can embody the idea of 
democracy.  
(B) The structure of polyarchical governments is free of hierarchical ordering.  
(C) The citizens of a polyarchy have equal access to the resources that provide 
political influence.  
(D) Polyarchy is  the best political system to foster the growth of political parties.  
(E) Polyarchy is a form of government that is not influenced by the interests of 
economic enterprises.  
12. Which one of the following is most closely analogous to pluralist democracies as 
they are described in relation to the democratic principle of po litical equality?  
(A) an exact copy of an ancient artifact that is on display in a museum  
(B) a performance of a musical score whose range of tonality cannot be 
completely captured by any actual instruments  
(C) a lecture by a former astronaut to a class of  young students who would like to 
be astronauts  
(D) the commemoration of a historical event each year by a historian presenting a 
lecture on a topic related to the event  
(E) the mold from which a number of identical castings of a sculpture are made  
13. Which one of the following, if true, would most strengthen Dahls defense of 
polyarchy?  
(A) The political agenda in a polyarchy is strongly influenced by how power  LSAT  805 
 resou rces other than the vote are distributed.  
(B) The outcome of elections is more often determined by the financial resources 
candidates are able to spend during campaigns than by their stands on 
political issue.  
(C) Public policy in a polyarchy is primarily determined by decision -makers who 
are not accountable to elected officials.  
(D) Political parties in a polyarchy help concentrate political power in the central 
government.  
(E) Small and diverse pressure groups are able to exert as much influence on 
public policy in a polyarchy as are large and powerful groups.  
14. The passage can best be described as  
(A) an inquiry into how present -day polyarchies can be made more democr atic 
(B) a commentary on the means pressure groups employ to exert influence within 
polyarchies  
(C) a description of the relationship between polyarchies and economic 
enterprises  
(D) a discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of polyarchy as a form of 
democracy  
(E) an overview of the similarities between political parties and pressure groups 
in a polyarchy  
The old belief that climatic stability accounts for the high level of species diversity in the 
Amazon River basin of South America emerged, strangely enoug h, from observations of the 
deep sea. Sanders discovered high diversity among the mud -dwelling animals of the deep 
ocean. He argued that such diversity could be attributed to the absence of significant 
fluctuations in climate and physical conditions, witho ut which the extinction of species should 
be rare. In the course of time  new species would continue to evolve, and so the rate of 
speciation  would be greater than the rate of extinction, resulting in the accumulation of great 
diversity. Sanders argued that the Amazon tropical rain forest is analogous to the deep sea: 
because the rain forest has a stable climate, extinction should be rare. Evidence that some 
species of rain -forest trees have persisted for some 30 million years in the Amazon basin , added 
to the absence o f winter and glaciation, supports this view.  
Recently however, several observations have cast doubt on the validity of the stability 
hypothesis and suggest that the climate of the Amazon basin has fluctuated significantly in the 
past. Haffer noted that dif ferent species of birds inhabit different corners of the basin in spite of 
the fact that essentially unbroken green forest spreads from the western edge to the eastern 
edge of the region. This pattern presented a puzzle to biologists studying the distribut ions of 
plants and animals: why would different species inhabit different parts of the forest if the 
habitat in which they lived had a stable climate?  
Haffer proposed a compelling explanation for the distribution of species. Observing that 
species found on  high ground are different from those on low ground and knowing that in the 
Amazon lowlands are drier than uplands, he proposed that during the ice ages the Amazon 806 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 lowlands became a near -desert arid plain ; meanwhile, the more elevated regions became 
island s of moisture and hence served as refuges for the fauna and flora of the rain forest. 
Populations that were once continuous diverged and became permanently separated. Haffers 
hypothesis appears to explain the distribution of species as well as the unusual  species diversity. 
The ice -age refuges would have protected existing species from extinction. But the periodic 
geographic isolation of related populations (there have been an estimated 13 ice ages to date) 
would have facilitated the development of new spe cies as existing species on the lowlands 
adapted to changing climates . 
Although no conclusive proof has yet been found to support Ha ffers hypothesis, it has led 
other researchers to gauge the effects of climatic changes, such as storms and flooding, on 
species diversity in the Amazon basin. Their research suggests that climatic disturbances help 
account for the splendid diversity of the Amazon rain forest . 
15. As discussed in the first paragraph of the passage, Sanders analogy between the 
deep sea and the  Amazon basin involves which one of the following 
assumptions?  
(A) Both the Amazon basin and the deep sea support an unusually high rate of 
speciation.  
(B) Both the rain-forest trees in the Amazon basin and the mud -dwelling animals 
in the deep sea have sur vived for 30 million years.  
(C) Both the deep sea and the Amazon basin have not experienced dramatic 
changes in climate or physical conditions.  
(D) A dependable supply of water to the Amazon basin and the deep sea has 
moderated the rate of extinction in bo th habitats.  
(E) The rate of speciation in the Amazon basin is equivalent to the rate of 
speciation in the deep sea.  
16. The author of the passage would most likely agree with which one of the 
following statements about Haffers hypothesis?  
(A) It provides an intri guing and complete explanation for the high rate of species 
diversity in the Amazon basin.  
(B) It is partially correct in that a number of climatic disturbances account for 
species diversity in the Amazon basin.  
(C) It has not yet been verified, but it has  had an influential effect on current 
research on species diversity in the Amazon basin.  
(D) It is better than Sanders theory in accounting for the low rate of species 
extinction in the Amazon basin.  
(E) It provides a compelling explanation for the distribution of species in the 
Amazon basin but does not account for the high species diversity.  
17. According to the passage, lowlands in the Amazon basin currently differ from 
uplands in which one of t he following respects?  
(A) Lowlands are desertlike, whereas uplands are lush.   LSAT  807 
 (B) Lowlands are less vulnerable to glaciation during the ice ages than are 
uplands.  
(C) Uplands support a greater diversity of species than do lowlands.  
(D) Uplands are wetter t han are lowlands.  
(E) Uplands are more densely populated than are lowlands.  
18. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A hypothesis is discussed, evidence that undercuts  that hypothesis is 
presented and a new hypothesis that may a ccount for the evidence is 
described.  
(B) A recently observed phenomenon is described, an explanation for that 
phenomenon is discussed, and the explanation is evaluated in light of 
previous research findings.  
(C) Several hypotheses that may account for a p uzzling phenomenon are 
described and discounted , and a more promising hypothesis is presented . 
(D) A hypothesis and the assumptions on which it is based are described , and 
evidence is provided to suggest that the hypothesis is only partially correct.  
(E) Two alternative explanations for a phenomenon are presented and compared , 
and experiments designed to test each theory are described.  
19. The author of the passage mentions the number of ice ages in the third paragraph 
most probably in order to  
(A) provide proof that cooler and drier temperatures are primarily responsible for 
the distribution of species in the Amazon  
(B) explain how populations of species were protected from extinction in the 
Amazon basin  
(C) explain how most existing species were a ble to survive periodic climatic 
disturbances in the Amazon basin  
(D) suggest that certain kinds of climatic disturbances cause more species 
diversity than do other kinds of climatic disturbances  
(E) suggest that geographic isolation may have occurred often enough to cause 
high species diversity in the Amazon basin  
20. The passage suggests that which one of the following is true of Sanders 
hypothesis?  
(A) He underestimated the effects of winte r and glaciation in the Amazon basin 
on the tropical rain forest.  
(B) He failed to recognize the similarity in physical conditions of the Amazon 
lowlands and the Amazon uplands.  
(C) He failed to take into a count the relatively high rate of extinction duri ng the 
ice ages in the Amazon basin.  
(D) He overestimated the length of time that species have survived in the Amazon 808 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 basin.  
(E) He failed to account for the distribution of species in the Amazon basin.  
21. Which one of the following is evidence that would contribute to the proof 
mentioned in line 54?  
(A) Accurately dated sediment cores from a freshwater lake in the Amazon  
indicate that the lakes water level rose significantly during the last ice age.  
(B) Data based on radiocarbon dating of fossils suggest that the Amazon uplands 
were too cold to support rain forests during the last ice age.  
(C) Computer models of climate during global ice ages predict only insignificant 
reductions of monsoon rains in tropical areas such as the Amazon.  
(D) Fossils preserved in the Amazon uplands during the last ice age are found 
together with minerals that are the products of an arid landsc ape. 
(E) Fossilized pollen from the Amazon lowlands indicates that during the last ice 
age the Amazon lowlands supported vegetation that needs little water rather 
than the rain forests they support today.  
Although surveys of medieval legislation, guild organization, and terminology used to 
designate different medical practitioners have demonstrated that numerous medical specialties 
were recognized in Europe during the Middle Ages , most historians continue to equate  the term 
woman medical practitioner, wherever they encounter it in medieval records , with midwife. 
This common practice obscures the fact that, although women were not represented on all 
levels of medicine equally, they were represented in a variety of s pecialties throughout the 
broad medical community. A reliable study by Wickersheimer and Jacquart documents that of 
7,647 medical practitioners in France during the twelfth through fifteenth centuries , 121 were 
women ; of these, only 44 were identified as m idwives, while the rest practiced as physicians, 
surgeons, apothecaries, barbers, and other healers.  
While preserving terminological distinctions somewhat increases the quality of the 
information extracted from medieval documents concerning women medical p ractitioners, 
scholars must also reopen the whole question of why documentary evidence for women 
medical practitioners comprises such a tiny fraction of the evidence historians of medieval 
medicine usually present. Is this due to the limitations of the his torical record, as has been 
claimed, or does it also result from the methods historians use? Granted, apart from medical 
licenses, the principal sources of information regarding medical practitioners available to 
researchers are wills, property transfers, court records, and similar documents, all of which 
typically underrepresent women because of restrictive medieval legal traditions. Nonetheless, 
the parameters researchers choose when they define their investigations may contribute to the 
problem. Studies focusing on the upper echelons of learned medicine , for example, tend to 
exclude healers on the legal and social fringes of medical practice , where most women would 
have been found.  
The advantages of broadening the scope of such studies is immediately ap parent in Pelling 
and Websters study of sixteenth -century London. Instead of focusing solely on officially 
recognized and licensed practitioners, the researchers defined a medical practitioner as any 
individual whose occupation is basically concerned wit h the care of the sick. Using this  LSAT  809 
 definition , they found primary source  information suggesting that there were 60 women 
medical practitioners in the city of London in 1560. Although this figure may be slightly 
exaggerated, t he evidence contrasts strikingly with that of Gottfried, whose earlier survey 
identified only 28 women medical practitioners in all of England between 1330 and 1530.  
Finally, such studies provide only statistical information about the variety and prevalenc e of 
womens medical practice in medieval Europe. Future studies might also make profitable use of 
analyses developed in other areas of womens history as a basis for exploring the social context 
of womens medical practice. Information about economic riva lry in medicine, womens literacy, 
and the control of medical knowledge could add much to our growing understanding of women 
medical practitioners role in medieval society . 
22. Which one of the following best expresses the main point of the passage?  
(A) R ecent studies demonstrate that women medical practitioners were more 
common in England than in the rest of Western Europe during the Middle 
Ages.  
(B) The quantity and quality of the information historians uncover concerning 
womens medical practice in medi eval Europe would be improved if they 
changed their methods of study.  
(C) The sparse evidence for women medical practitioners in studies dealing with 
the Middle Ages is due primarily to the limitations of the historical record.  
(D) Knowledge about the soci al issues that influenced the role women medical 
practitioners played in medieval society has been enhanced by several recent 
studies.  
(E) Analyses developed in other areas of womens history could probably be used 
to provide more information about the social context of womens medical 
practice during the Middle Ages.  
23. Which one of the following is most closely analogous to the err or the author 
believes historians make when they equate the term woman medical 
practitioner with midwife?  
(A) equating pear with apple  
(B) equating science with biology  
(C) equating supervisor with subordinate  
(D) equating member with nonmember  
(E) equating instructor with trainee  
24. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to agree 
with which one of the following assertions regarding Gottfrieds study?  
(A) Gottfrieds study would have recorded a much larger number of  women 
medical practitioners if the time frame covered by the study had included the 
late sixteenth century.  
(B) The small number of women medical practitioners identified in Gottfrieds 
study is due primarily to problems caused by inaccurate sources.  810 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (C) The small number of women medical practitioners identified in Gottfrieds 
study is due primarily to the loss of many medieval documents.  
(D) The results of Gottfrieds study need to be considered in light of the social 
changes occurring in Western Europe d uring the fourteenth and fifteenth 
centuries.  
(E) In setting the parameters for his study. Gottfried appears to have defined the 
term medical practitioner very narrowly.  
25. The passage suggests that a future study that would be more informative about 
medieval women medical practitioners might f ocus on which one of the 
following?  
(A) the effect of social change on the political and economic structure of 
medieval society  
(B) the effect of social constraints on medieval womens access to a medical 
education  
(C) the types of medical specialties that  developed during the Middle Ages  
(D) the reasons why medieval historians tend to equate the term  woman medical 
practitioner with midwife  
(E) the historical developments responsible for the medieval legal traditions 
restrictions on women  
26. The author refers to the study by Wickersheimer and Jacquart in order to  
(A) demonstrate that numerous medical specialties were recognized in Weste rn 
Europe during the Middle Ages  
(B) demonstrate that women are often underrepresented in studies of medieval 
medical practitioners  
(C) prove that midwives were officially recognized as members of the medical 
community during the Middle Ages  
(D) prove that  midwives were only a part of a larger community of women 
medical practitioners during the Middle Ages  
(E) prove that the existence of midwives can be documented in Western Europe 
as early as the twelfth century  
27. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with doing which one of the 
following?  
(A) describing new methodological approaches  
(B) r evising the definitions of certain concepts  
(C) comparing two different analyses  
(D) arguing in favor of changes in method  
(E) chronicling certain historical developments  
LSAT   13    SECTION III  LSAT  811 
 Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
Modern architecture has been criticized for emphasizing practical and technical issues at 
the expense of aestheti c concerns. The high -rise buildings constructed throughout the 
industrialized world in the 1960s and 1970s provide ample evidence that cost-efficiency and 
utility have became the overriding concerns of the modern architect. However, Otto Wagners 
seminal t ext on modern architecture, first published in Germany in 1896, indicates that the 
failure of modern architecture cannot be blamed on the ideals of its founders.  
Wagners Modern Architecture  called for a new style based on modern technologies and 
models of  construction. He insisted that there could be no return to traditional, preindustrial 
models; only by accepting wholeheartedly the political and technological revolutions of the 
nineteenth century could the architect establish the forms appropriate to a m odern, urban 
society. All modern creation, Wagner wrote, must correspond to the new materials and 
demands of the presentmust illustrate our own better, democratic, self -confident, ideal 
nature , and must incorporate the new  colossal  technical and scie ntific achievements  of the 
age. This would indeed seem to be the basis of a purely materialist definition of architecture, a 
prototype for the simplistic form -follows -function dogma that opponents have identified as the 
intellectual basis of modern archit ecture.  
But the picture was more complex, for Wagner was always careful to distinguish between 
art and engineering. Ultimately, he envisaged  the architect developing the skills of the engineer 
without losing the powers of aesthetic judgment that Wagner felt were unique to the artist. 
Since the engineer is seldom a born artist and the architect must learn as a rule  to be an 
engineer, architects will in time succeed in extending their influence into the realm occupied by 
the engineers, so that legitimate aesthetic demands can be met in a satisfactory way. In this 
symbiotic relationship essential to Modernism, art was to exerc ise the controlling influence.  
No other prospect was imaginable for Wagner, who was firmly rooted as a designer and, 
indeed, as a teacher in the Classical tradition. The apparent inconsistency of a confessed 
Classicist advising against the mechanical imita tion of historical models and arguing for new 
forms appropriate to the modern age created exactly the tension that made Wagners writings 
and buildings so interesting. While he justified, for example, the choice of a circular ground plan 
for churches in te rms of optimal sight -lines and the technology of the gasometer, the true 
inspiration was derived from the centralized churches of the Italian Renaissance. He 
acknowledged as rationalist that there was no way back to the social and technological 
conditions that had produced the work of Michelangelo or Fischer von Erlach, but he recognized 
his emotional attachment to the great works of the Italian Renaissance and Austrian Baroque.  
1. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Modern architecture has been criticized for emphasizing practical and 
technical issues and for failing to focus on aesthetic concerns.  812 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (B) Critics have failed to take into account the technological innovations and 
aesthetic features that architects have in corporated into modern buildings.  
(C) Wagners Modern Architecture  provides architects with a chronicle of the 
origins of modern architecture.  
(D) Wagners Modern Architecture  indicates that the founders of modern 
architecture did not believe that practica l issues should supersede the 
aesthetic concerns of the past.  
(E) Wagners seminal text, Modern Architecture , provides the intellectual basis 
for the purely materialistic definition of modern architecture.  
2. According to the passage, Wagner asserts which one of the following about the 
roles of architect and engi neer?  
(A) The architect should make decision about aesthetic issues and leave decision 
about technical matters to the engineers.  
(B) The engineer has often developed the powers of aesthetic judgment 
previously thought to be unique to the architect.  
(C) The  judgment of the engineer should be as important as the judgment of the 
architect when decisions are made about aesthetic issues.  
(D) The technical judgment of the engineer should prevail over  the aesthetic 
judgment of the architect in the design of modern buildings.  
(E) The architect should acquire the knowledge of technical matters typically held 
by the engineer.  
3. The passage suggests that Wagner would be LEAST likely to agree wit h which 
one of the following statements about classical architecture and the modern 
architect?  
(A) The modern architect should avoid the mechanical imitation of the models of 
the Italian Renaissance and Austrian Baroque.  
(B) The modern architect cannot des ign buildings appropriate to a modern, urban 
society and still retain emotional attachments to the forms of the Italian 
Renaissance and Austrian Baroque.  
(C) The modern architect should possess knowledge of engineering as well as of 
the architecture of the  past. 
(D) The modern architect should not base designs on the technological conditions 
that underlay the design of the models of the Italian Renaissance and 
Austrian Baroque.  
(E) The designs of modern architects should reflect political ideals differen t from 
those reflected in the designs of classical architecture.  
4. The passage suggests which one of the following about the quotations from 
Modern Architecture  cited in the second paragraph?  
(A) They represent the part of Wagners work that has had the l east influence on 
the architects who designed the high -rise buildings of the 1960s and 1970s.   LSAT  813 
 (B) They describe the part of Wagners work that is most often evoked by 
proponents of Wagners ideas on art and technology.  
(C) They do not adequately reflect th e complexity of Wagners ideas on the use of 
modern technology in architecture.  
(D) They reflect Wagners active participation in the political revolutions of the 
nineteenth century.  
(E) They provide an overview of Wagners ideas on the relationship bet ween art 
and technology.  
5. The author of the passage states which one of the following about the concerns of 
modern  architecture?  
(A) Cost -efficiency, utility, and aesthetic demands are the primary concerns of the 
modern architect.  
(B) Practical issues su persede aesthetic concerns in the design of many modern 
buildings.  
(C) Cost -efficiency is more important to the modern architects than are other 
practical concerns.  
(D) The design of many new buildings suggests that modern architects are still 
inspired by architectural forms of the past.  
(E) Many modern architects use current technology to design modern buildings 
that are aesthetically pleasing.  
6. The author mentions Wagners choice of a circular ground plan for churches 
(line 54) most likely in order  to 
(A) provide an example of the kinds of technological innovations Wagner 
introduced into modern architecture  
(B) provide an example of Wagners dismissal of historical forms from Italian 
Renaissance  
(C) provide an example of a modern building where tech nological issues were 
much less significant than aesthetic demands  
(D) provide evidence of Wagners tendency to imitate Italian Renaissance and 
Austrian Baroque models  
(E) provide evidence of the tension between Wagners commitment to modern 
technology and to the Classical tradition  
7. The passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) summarizing the history of a debate  
(B) explaining a traditional argument  
(C) describing and evaluating a recent approach  
(D) justifying a recent criticism by presenting new evidence  
(E) supporting an assertion by discussing an important work  
In order to explain the socioeconomic achievement, in the face of  disadvan tages due to 814 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 racial discrimination, of Chinese and Japanese immigration to the United States and their 
descendants, sociologists have typically applied either culturally based or structurally based 
theories but never both together. To use an economic metap hor, culturally based explanations 
assert the importance of the supply side of the labor market, emphasizing the qualities 
immigrant groups bring with them for competition in the United States labor market. Such 
explanations reflect a human -capital perspec tive in which status attainment is seen as a result 
of individuals ability to generate resources. Structurally based explanations, on the other hand, 
examine the market condition of the immigrants host society , particularly its discriminatory 
practices a nd their impact on the status attainment process of immigrant groups. In the 
economic metaphor, structural explanations assert the importance of the demand side of the 
labor market.  
In order to understand the socioeconomic mobility of Chinese and Japanese immigrants 
and their descendants, only an analysis of supply -side and demand -side factors together, in the 
context of historical events, will suffice. On the cultural or supply side, differences in 
immigration pattern and family formation resulted in diffe rent rates of socioeconomic 
achievement for Chinese and Japanese immigrants. For various reasons, Chinese immigrants 
remained sojourners and did not (except for urban merchants) establish families. They were 
also hampered by ethnic conflict in the labor ma rket. Japanese immigrants , on the other hand, 
were less constrained, made the transition from sojourner  to settler  within the first two decades 
of immigration, and left low -wage labor to establish small businesses based on a household 
mode of production. C hinese sojourners without families were more vulnerable to 
demoralization, whereas Japanese immigrants faced societal hostility with the emotional 
resources provide by a stable family life. Once Chinese immigrants began to establish nuclear 
families and pr oduce a second generation, instituting household production similar to that 
established by Japanese immigrants, their socioeconomic attainment soon paralleled that of 
Japanese immigrants and their descendants.  
On the structural or demand side, changes in i nstitutional constraints, immigration laws, 
labor markets, and societal hostility were rooted in the dynamics of capitalist economic 
development. Early capitalist development generated a demand for low -wage labor that could 
not be fulfilled. Early Chinese and Japanese emigration was a response to this demand. In an 
advanced capitalist economy, the demand for immigrant labor is more differentiated: skilled 
professional and technical labor fills empty positions in the primary labor market and, with the 
tradit ional unskilled low-wage labor, creates two immigrant streams. The high levels of 
education attained by the descendants of Chinese and Japanese immigrants and their 
concentration in strategic states such as California paved the way for the movement of the 
second generation into the expanding primary labor market in the advanced capitalist economy 
that existed after the Second World War.  
8. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) The socioeconomic achievement of Chinese an d Japanese immigrants and 
their descendants is best explained by a historical examination of the 
economic structures prevalent in the United States when such immigrant 
groups arrived.  
(B) The socioeconomic achievement of Chinese and Japanese immigrants and   LSAT  815 
 their descendants is best explained by an examination of their cultural 
backgrounds, in particular their level of educational attainment.  
(C) The socioeconomic achievement of Chinese and Japanese immigrants and 
their descendants has taken place in the con text of a culturally based 
emphasis on the economic welfare of the nuclear family.  
(D) Only the market structure of the capitalist economy of the United States in 
which supply has historically been regulated by demand can account for the 
socioeconomic achi evement of Chinese and Japanese immigrants and their 
descendants.  
(E) Only an analysis that combines an examination of the culture of Chinese and 
Japanese immigrant groups and the socioeconomic structure of the host 
country can adequately explain the so cioeconomic achievement of Chinese 
and Japanese immigrants and their descendants.  
9. Which one of the following can best be described as a supply -side element in the 
labor market, as such elements are explained in the passage?  
(A) concentration of small bu sinesses in a given geographical area  
(B) need for workers with varying degrees of skill  
(C) high value placed by immigrants on work  
(D) expansion of the primary labor market  
(E) development of an advanced capitalist economy  
10. Which one of the following best states the function of the authors mention of 
two immigration streams (line 62)?  
(A) It demonstrates the effects of changes in human capital.  
(B) It illustrates th e operation of the primary labor market.  
(C) It explains the nature of early Chinese and Japanese immigration.  
(D) It characterize s the result of changing demand -side factors.  
(E) It underscores an influence on the labor market.  
11. It can be inferred t hat the authors analysis of the socioeconomic achievement of 
Chinese and Japanese immigrants and their descendants differs from that of most 
sociologists primarily in that most sociologists  
(A) address the effects of the interaction of causal factors  
(B) exclude the factor of a developing capitalist economy  
(C) do not apply an economic metaphor  
(D) emphasize the disadvantageous effects of racial discrimination  
(E) focus on a single type of theoretical explanation  
12. It can be inferred that which one of the following was an element of the 
experience of both Chinese and Japanese immigrants in the United States?  
(A) initial status as sojourners  816 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (B) slow accumu lation of capital  
(C) quick transition from laborer to manager  
(D) rapid establishment of nuclear families  
(E) rapid acquisition of technical skills  
13. The author is primarily concerned with  
(A) advancing a synthesis of approaches to an issue  
(B) chall enging a tentative answer to a question  
(C) evaluating the soundness of theories  
(D) resolving the differences between schools of thought  
(E) outlining the achievements of a group  
Although the legal systems of England and the United States are superfici ally similar, they 
differ profoundly in their approaches to and uses of legal reasons: substantive reasons in the 
United States, whereas in England the reverse is true. This distinction reflects a difference in 
the visions of law that prevail in the two co unties. In England the law has traditionally been 
viewed as a system of rules; the United States favors a vision of law as an outward expression 
of the communitys sense of right an d justice.  
Substantive reasons, as applied to law, are based on moral, econ omic, political, and other 
considerations. These reasons are found both in the law and outside the law , so to speak . 
Substantive reasons inform  the content of a large part of the law : constitutions, statutes, 
contracts, verdicts, and the like. Consider, for example, a statute providing  (to make a proviso 
or stipulation ) that no vehicles shall be taken into public parks. Suppose that no specific 
rationales or purposes were explicitly written into this statute, but that it was clear (from its 
legislative history) that the substantive purpose of the statute was to ensure quiet and safety in 
the park. Now suppose that a veterans group mounts a World War II jeep (in running order but 
without a battery) as a war memorial on a concrete slab in the park, and charges are brought 
against its members. Most judges in the United States would find the defendants not guilty 
because what they did had no adverse effec t on park quiet and safety.  
Formal reasons are different in that they frequently prevent substantive reasons from 
coming into play, even when substantive reasons are explicitly incorporated into the law at 
hand. For example, when a document fails to comply  with stipulated requirements, the court 
may render the document legally ineffective. A will requiring written witness may be declared 
null and void and therefore, unenforceable for the formal reason that the requirement was not 
observed. Once the legal ru lethat a will is invalid for lack of proper witnessing has been 
clearly established, and the legality of the rule is not in question, application of that rule 
precludes from consideration substantive arguments in favor of the wills validity or 
enforcemen t. 
Legal scholars in England and the United States have long bemused themselves with 
extreme examples of formal and substantive reasoning. On the one hand, formal reasoning in 
England has led to wooden interpretations of statutes and an unwillingness to de velop the 
common law through judicial activism. On the other hand, freewheeling substantive reasoning 
in the United States has resulted in statutory interpretations so liberal that the texts of some  LSAT  817 
 statutes have been ignored altogether.  
14. Which one of t he following best describes the content of the passage as a whole?  
(A) an analysis of similarities and differences between the legal systems of 
England and the United States  
(B) a reevaluation of two legal systems with the use of examples  
(C) a contrast be tween the types of reasons embodied in the United States and 
England legal systems  
(D) an explanation of how two distinct visions of the law shaped the development 
of legal reasoning  
(E) a presentation of two types of legal reasons that shows the characteristics they 
have in common  
15. It can be inferred from the passage that English judges would be likely to find the 
veterans group discussed in the second paragraph guilty of viol ating the statute 
because  
(A) not to do so would encourage others to act as the group did  
(B) not to do so would be to violate the substantive reasons underlying the law  
(C) the veterans failed to comply with the substantive purpose of the statute  
(D) the veterans failed to demonstrate that their activities had no adverse effect on 
the public  
(E) the veterans failed to comply with the stipulated requirements of the statute  
16. From the discussion of wills in the third paragraph it can be inferred that 
substantive arguments as to the validity of a will might be considered under 
which one of the following circumstances?  
(A) The legal rule requiring that a will be witnessed in writing does not stipulate 
the format of the will.  
(B) The legal rule requiring that a will be witnessed stipulates that the will must 
be witnessed in writing by two peop le. 
(C) The legal rule requiring that a will be witnessed in writing stipulates that the 
witnessing must be done in the presence of a judge . 
(D) A judge rules that the law requires a will to be witnessed in writing regardless 
of extenuating circumstances . 
(E) A judge rules that the law can be interpreted to allow for a verbal witness to a 
will in a case involving a medical emergency.  
17. The author of the passage makes use of all of the following in presenting the 
discussion of the English and the United States legal systems EXCEPT  
(A) comparison and contrast  
(B) generalization  
(C) explication  of term  
(D) a chronology of historical developments  818 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (E) a hypothetical case  
18. Which one of the following best describes the function of the last paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) It presents the consequences of extreme interpretations of the two types of 
legal reasons discussed by the author.  
(B) It shows how legal scholars can incorrectly use extreme examples to support 
their views.  
(C) It corrects inaccuracies in legal scholars views of the nature of the two types 
of legal systems.  
(D) It suggests how characterizations of the two types of legal reasons can 
become convoluted and inaccurate.  
(E) It presents scholars characterizations of both legal systems that are only 
partially correct.  
19. The author of the passage suggests that in English law a substantive interpretation 
of a legal rule might be warranted under which one of the followi ng 
circumstances?  
(A) Social conditions have changed to the extent that to continue to enforce the 
rule would be to decide contrary to present -day social norms.  
(B) The composition of the legislature has changed to the extent that to enforce 
the rule would  be contrary to the views of the majority in the present 
legislative assembly.  
(C) The legality of the rule is in question and its enforcement is open to judicial 
interpretation.  
(D) Individuals who have violated the legal rule argue that application of th e rule 
would lead to unfair judicial interpretations.  
(E) Superior court judges have consistently ruled in decisions regarding the 
interpretation of the legal rule.  
20. According to the passage, which one of the following statements about 
substantive re asons is true?  
(A) They may be written into laws, but they may also exert an external influence 
on the law.  
(B) They must be explicitly written into the law in order to be relevant to the 
application of the law.  
(C) They are legal in nature and determine p articular applications of most laws.  
(D) They often provide judges with specific rationales for disregarding the laws 
of the land.  
(E) They are peripheral to the law, whereas formal reasons are central to the law.  
How does the brain know when carbohydrates have been or should be consumed? The 
answer to this question is not known, but one element in the explanation seems to be the 
neurotransmitter serotonin , one of a class of chemical mediators that may be released from a  LSAT  819 
 presynaptic neuron and that cause the transmission of a nerve impulse across a synapse to an 
adjacent postsynaptic neuron. In general, it has been found that drugs that selectively facilitate 
serotonin -mediated neurotransmission tend to cause weight loss, whereas drugs that block 
serotonin -mediated transmission often have the opposite effect: they often induce 
carbohydrate craving and conseq uent weight gain.  
Serotonin is a derivative of tryptophan , an amino acid that is normally present at low levels 
in the bloodstream. The rate of conversion is affected by the proportion of carbohydrates in an 
individuals diet: carbohydrates stimulate the secretion of insulin, which facilitates the up take of 
most amino acids into peripheral tissues, such as muscles. Blood tryptophan levels, however, 
are unaffected by insulin, so the proportion of tryptophan in the blood relative to the other 
amino acids increases when carbohydrates are consumed. Since tryptophan competes with 
other amino acids for transport across the blood -brain barrier into the brain, insulin secretion 
indirectly speeds tryptophans entry into the central nervous system  where, in a special cluster 
of neurons, it is converted into serotonin.  
The level of serotonin in the brain in turn affects the amount of carbohydrate an individual 
chooses to eat. Rats that are allowed to choose among synthetic foods containi ng different 
proportions of carbohydrate and protein will normally alternate between foods containing 
mostly protein and those containing mostly carbohydrate. However, if rats are given drugs that 
enhance the effect of serotonin, the rats carbohydrate int ake is reduced. On the other hand, 
when rats are given drugs that interrupt serotonin -mediated neurotransmission, their brains fail 
to respond when carbohydrates are eaten, so the desire for them persists.  
In human beings a serotoninlike drug, d-fenflurami ne (which release serotonin into brain 
synapses and then prolong its action by blocking its reabsorption into the presynaptic neuron), 
selectively suppresses carbohydrate snacking (and its associated weight gain) in people who 
crave carbohydrates. In contr ast, drugs that block serotonin -mediated transmission or that 
interact with neurotransmitters other than serotonin have the opposite effect: they often 
induce carbohydrate craving and subsequent weight gain. People who crave carbohydrates 
report feeling re freshed and invigorated after eating a carbohydrate -rich meal (which would be 
expected to increase brain serotonin levels), in contrast, those who do not crave carbohydrates 
become sleepy following a high -carbohydrate meal. These findings suggest that sero tonin has 
other effects that may be useful indicators of serotonin levels in human beings.  
21. Which one of the following best states the main idea of the passage  
(A) The bodys need for carbohydrates varies with the level of serotonin in the 
blood.  
(B) Th e bodys use of carbohydrates can be regulated by the administration of 
serotoninlike drugs.  
(C) The role of serotonin in regulating the consumption of carbohydrates is 
similar in rats and in humans.  
(D) The bodys desire for carbohydrates can be influence d by serotonin or 
serotoninlike drugs.  
(E) Tryptophan initiates a chain of events that regulates the bodys use of 
carbohydrates.  820 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 22. The term rate (line 17) refers to the rate at which  
(A) serotonin is produced from tryptophan  
(B) carbohydrates are taken into the body  
(C) carbohydrates s timulate the secretion of insulin  
(D) insulin facilitates the uptake of amino acids into peripheral tissues  
(E) tryptophan enters the bloodstream  
23. It can be inferred that a person is likely to carve carbohydrates when  
(A) the amount of insulin produc ed is too high  
(B) the amount of serotonin in the brain is too low  
(C) more tryptophan than usual crosses the blood -brain barrier  
(D) neurotransmission by neurotransmitters other than serotonin is interrupted  
(E) amino acids other than tryptophan are ta ken up by peripheral tissues  
24. The information in the passage indicates that if human beings were given a drug 
that inhibits the action of serotonin, which one of the following might be 
expected to occur?  
(A) Subjects would probably show a preference for  carbohydrate -rich snacks 
rather than protein -rich snacks.  
(B) Subjects would probably become sleepy after eating a carbohydrate -rich 
meal.  
(C) Subjects would be more likely to lose weight than before they took the drug.  
(D) Subjects blood tryptophan leve ls would probably increase.  
(E) Subjects desire for both carbohydrates and proteins would increase.  
25. The primary purpose of the second paragraph in the passage is to  
(A) provide an overview of current research concerning the effect of serotonin on 
carbohydrate consumption  
(B) contrast the role of tryptophan in the body with that of serotonin  
(C) discuss the role of serotonin in the transmission of neural impulses  
(D) explain how the brain knows that carbohydrates should be consumed  
(E) establish a  connection between carbohydrate intake and the production of 
serotonin  
26. It can be inferred that after a person has taken d-fenflurarmine, he or she will 
probably be  
(A) inclined to gain weight  
(B) sleepy much of the time  
(C) unlikely to crave carbohydr ates 
(D) unable to sleep as much as usual  
(E) likely to secrete more insulin than usual   LSAT  821 
 27. The authors primary purpose is to  
(A) defend a point of view  
(B) correct a misconception  
(C) assess conflicting evidence  
(D) suggest new directions for investigation  
(E) provide information that hel ps explain a phenomenon  
LSAT   14    SECTION III  
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, m ore than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
A major  tenet of the neurosciences has been that all neurons (nerve cells) in the brains of 
vertebrate animals are formed early in development. An adult vertebrate, it was believed, must 
make do with  a fixed number of neurons: those lost th rough disease or injury are not replaced, 
and adult learning takes place not through generation of new cells but through modification of 
connections among existing ones.  
However, new evidence for neurogenesis (the birth of new neurons) has come from the 
study of canary song. Young canaries and other songbirds learn to sing much as humans learn 
to speak, by imitating models provided by their elders. Several weeks after birth, a young bird 
produces its first rudimentary attempts at singing; over the next few months the song becomes 
more structured and stable, reaching a fully developed state by the time the bird approaches its 
first breeding season . But this repertoire of song is not permanently learned. After each 
breeding season, durin g late summer and fall, the bird loses mastery of its developed 
vocabulary , and its song becomes as unstable as that of a juvenile bird. During the following 
winter and spring, however, the canary acquires new songs, and by the next breeding season it 
has developed an entirely new repertoire.  
Recent neurological research into this learning and relearning process has shown that the 
two most important regions of the canarys brain related to the learning of songs actually vary 
in size at different times of the year. In the spring, when the birds song is highly developed and 
uniform, the regions are roughly twice as large as they are in the fall. Further experiments 
tracing individual nerve cells within these regions have shown that the number of neurons 
drops by about 38 percent after the breeding season, but by the following breeding season, 
new ones have been generated to replace them. A possible explanation for this continual 
replacement of nerve cells may have to do with the canary s relatively long life  span and the 
requirements of flight. Its brain would have to be substantially larger and heavier than might be 
feasible for flying if it had to carry all the brain cells needed to process and retain all the 
information gathered over a lifetime.  
Although t he idea of neurogenesis in the adult mammalian brain is still not generally 
accepted, these findings might help uncover a mechanism that would enable the human brain 822 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 to repair itself through neurogenesis. Whether such replacement of neurons would disrupt 
complex learning processes or long -term memory is not known, but songbird research 
challenges  scientists to identify the genes or hormones that orchestrate  neurogenesis in the 
young human brain and to learn how  to activate them in the adult brain.  
1. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) New evidence of neurogenesis in canaries challenges an established 
neurological theory concerning brain cells in vertebrates and suggests t he 
possibility that human brains may repair themselves.  
(B) The brains of canaries differ from the brains of other vertebrate animals in 
that the brains of adult canaries are able to generate neurons . 
(C) Recent studies of neurogenesis in canaries, buildin g on established theories of 
vertebrate neurology, provide important clues as to why researchers are not 
likely to discover neurogenesis in adult humans . 
(D) Recent research into neurogenesis in canaries refutes a long -held belief about 
the limited supply of brain cells and provides new information about 
neurogenesis in the adult human brain . 
(E) New information about neurogenesis in canaries challenges older hypotheses 
and clarifies the importance of the yearly cycle in learning processes and 
neurological replacement among vertebrates . 
2. According to the passage, which one of the followin g is true of the typical adult 
canary during the late summer and fall?  
(A) The canarys song repertoire takes on a fully structured and stable quality . 
(B) A process of neurogenesis replaces the song -learning neurons that were lost 
during the preceding mon ths. 
(C) The canary begins to learn an entirely new repertoire of songs based on the 
models of other canaries . 
(D) The regions in the canarys brain that are central to the learning of song 
decrease in size . 
(E) The canary performs slightly modifie d versions of the songs it learned during 
the preceding breeding season . 
3. Information in the passage suggests that the author would most likely regard 
which one of the following as LEAST important in future res earch on 
neurogenesis in humans?  
(A) research on possible similarities between the neurological structures of 
humans and canaries  
(B) studies that compare the ratio of brain weight to body weight in canaries to 
that in humans  
(C) neurological research on t he genes or hormones that activate neurogenesis in 
the brain of human infants  
(D) studies about the ways in which long -term memory functions in the human  LSAT  823 
 brain  
(E) research concerning the processes by which humans learn complicated tasks  
4. Which one of the following, if true, would most seriously undermine the 
explanation proposed by the author in the third paragraph?  
(A) A number of songbird species related  to the canary have a shorter life span 
than the canary and do not experience neurogenesis . 
(B) The brain size of several types of airborne birds with life spans similar to 
those of canaries has been shown to vary according to a two -year cycle of 
neurogene sis. 
(C) Several species of airborne  birds similar to canaries in size are known to have 
brains that are substantially heavier than the canarys brain . 
(D) Individual canaries that have larger -than-average repertoires of songs tend to 
have better developed  muscles for flying . 
(E) Individual canaries with smaller and lighter brains than the average tend to 
retain a smaller -than-average repertoire of songs . 
5. The use of the word vocabulary (line 23) serves primarily to  
(A) demonstrate the presence of a rudimentary grammatical structure in canary 
song  
(B) point out a similarity between the patterned groupings of sounds in a canarys 
song and the syllabic structures of words  
(C) stress the stability and uniformity of canarys song throughout its lifetime  
(D) suggest a similarity between the possession of a repertoire of words among 
humans and a repertoire of songs among canaries  
(E) imply that the complexity of the canarys song repertoire is equal to that of 
human language  
6. According to the passage, which one of the following factors may help account 
for the occurrence of neurogenesis in canaries?  
(A) the life span of the a verage canary  
(B) the process by which canaries learn songs  
(C) the frequency of canary breeding seasons  
(D) the number of regions in the canary brain related to song learning  
(E) the amount of time an average canary needs to learn a repertoire of songs  
7. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the third 
paragraph?  
(A) A theory is presented, analyzed, and modified, and a justification for the 
modification is offer . 
(B) Research results are advanced and reconciled with results from other studies, 
and a shared principle is described . 
(C) Research results are presented, further details are provided, and a hypothesis 824 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 is offered to explain the results . 
(D) Research results are reported, their implications are explained, and an 
applicatio n to a related field is proposed.  
(E) Research results are reported, their significance is clarified, and they are 
reconciled with previously established neurological tenets . 
8. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would most likely descr ibe the 
current understanding of neurogenesis as  
(A) exhaustive  
(B) progressive  
(C) incomplete  
(D) antiquated  
(E) incorrect  
For too many years scholars of African American history focused on the harm done by 
slaveholders and by the institution of slaver y, rather than on what Africans in the United States 
were able to accomplish despite the effects of that institution. In Myne Owne Ground , T. H. 
Breen and Stephen Innes contribute significantly to a recent, welcome shift from a 
white -centered to a black -centered inquiry into the role of African Americans in the American 
colonial period. Breen and Innes focus not on slaves, but on a small group of freed indentured 
servants in Northampton County (in the Chesapeake Bay region of Virginia) who, according to 
the authors, maintained their freedom, secured property, and interacted with persons of 
different races and economic standing from 1620 through the 1670s. African Americans living 
on the Chesapeake were to some extent disadvantaged, say Breen and Innes, but t his did not 
preclude the attainment of status roughly equal to that of certain white planters of the area. 
Continuously acting within black social networks, and forming economic relationships with 
white planters, local Native Americans, indentured servants , and white settlers outside the 
gentry class, the free African Americans of Northampton County held their own  in the 
rough -hewn  world of Chesapeake Bay.  
The authors emphasize that in this early period , when the percentage of African Americans 
in any given Chesapeake county was still no more than 10 percent of the population, very little 
was predetermined so far as racial status or race relations were concerned . By schooling 
themselves in the local lega l process and by working prodigiously on the land , African 
Americans acquired property, established families, and warded off contentious white neighbors. 
Breen and Innes do acknowledge that political power on the Chesapeake was asymmetrically 
distributed a mong black and white residents. However, they underemphasize much evidence 
that customary law, only gradually embodies in statutory law , was closing in  on free African 
Americans well before the 1670s: during the 1660s, when the proportion of African Americans 
in Virginia increased dramatically , Virginia tightened a law regulating interracial relations (1662) 
and enacted a statute prohibiting baptism from altering slave status (1667). Anthony Johnson, 
a leader in the community of free African Americans in the Chesapeake Bay region, sold the 
land he had cultivated for more than twenty years and moved north with his family around 
1665, an action that the authors attribute to a search for fresh, more productive land. But the 
answer to why the Johnsons left that area where they had labored so long may lie in their  LSAT  825 
 realization that their white neighbors were already beginning the transi tion from a largely white 
indentured labor force to reliance on a largely black slave labor force, and that the institution of 
slavery was threatening their descendants chances for freedom and success in Virginia.  
9. The author of the passage objects to m any scholarly studies of African American 
history for which one of the following reasons?  
(A) Their emphases have been on statutory law rather than on customary law . 
(B) They have ignored specific historical situations and personages in favor of 
broad inte rpretations . 
(C) They have focused on the least eventful periods in African American history . 
(D) They have underemphasized the economic system that was the basis of the 
institution of slavery . 
(E) They have failed to focus to a sufficient extent on the achievements of African 
Americans . 
10. Which one of the following can be inferred from the passage concerning the 
relationship between the African American population and the law in the 
Chesap eake Bay region of Virginia Between 1650 and 1670?  
(A) The laws affecting black citizens were embodies in statutes much more 
gradually than were lays affecting white citizens . 
(B) As the percentage of black citizens in the population grew, the legal 
restri ctions placed on them also increased . 
(C) Because of discriminatory laws, black farmers suffered more economic 
setbacks than did white farmers . 
(D) Because of legal constraints on hiring indentured servants, black farmers 
faced a chronic labor shortage on their farms . 
(E) The adherence to customary law was more rigid in regions with relatively 
large numbers of free black citizens . 
11. The author of the passage most probably refers to Anthony Johnson and his 
family in order to  
(A) provide a specific examp le of the potential shortcomings of Breen and Innes 
interpretation of historical events  
(B) provide a specific example of relevant data overlooked by Breen and Innes in 
their discussion of historical events  
(C) provide a specific example of data that Bree n and Innes might profitably have 
used in proving their thesis  
(D) argue that the standard interpretation of historical events is superior to Breen 
and Innes revisionist interpretation  
(E) argue that a new historiographical  method is needed to provide a full and 
coherent reading of historical events  
12. The attitude of the author of the passage toward Breen and Innes study can best 826 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 be described as one of  
(A) condescending dismissal  
(B) wholehearted acceptance  
(C) contentious challenge  
(D) qualified approval  
(E) sincere puzzlement  
13. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) summarize previous interpretations  
(B) advocate a new approach  
(C) propose and then illustrate a thesis  
(D) present and evaluate an interpretation  
(E) describe a historical event  
Late nineteenth -century books about the French artist Watteau (1684 -1721) betray a 
curious blind spot : more than any single artist before or since, Watteau pro vided his age with 
an influential image of itself, and nineteenth -century writers accepted this image as genuine. 
This was largely due to the enterprise of Watteaus friends who, soon after his death, organized 
the printing of engraved reproductions of the  great bulk of his work both his paintings and his 
drawings so that Watteaus total artistic output became and continued to be more accessible 
than that of any other artist until the twentieth -century advent of art monographs illustrated 
with photographs. These engravings presented aristocratic (and would -be aristocratic) 
eighteenth -century French society with an image of itself that was highly acceptable and widely 
imitate by other artists, however little relationship that image bore to reality. By 1884, t he 
bicentenary of Watteaus birth, it was standard practice for biographers to refer to him as the 
personification of the witty and amiable eighteenth century . 
In fact, Watteau saw little enough of that witty and amiable century for which so much 
nosta lgia was generally felt between about 1870 and 1920, a period during which enthusiasm 
for the artist reached its peak. The eighteenth centurys first decades, the period of his artistic 
activity, were fairly calamitous ones. During his short life, France w as almost continually at war: 
his native region was overrun with foreign troops, and Paris was threatened by siege and by a 
rampaging army rabble. The dreadful winter of 1709, the year of Watteau s first Paris success es, 
was marked by military defeat and a  disastrous famine.  
Most of Watteaus nineteenth -century admirers simply ignored the grim background of the 
works they found so lyrical and charming. Those who took the inconvenient historical facts into 
consideration did so only in order to refute the wid ely held deterministic view that the content 
and style of an artists work were absolutely dictated by heredity and environment. (For 
Watteau admirers, such determinism was unthinkable: the artist was born in a Flemish town 
only six years after it first be came part of France, yet Watteau was quintessentially French. As 
one patriotic French biographer put it, In Dreden, Potsdam, and Berlin I have never come 
across a Watteau without feeling refreshed by a breath of native air. Even such writers, 
however, pe rsisted in according Watteaus canvases a privileged status as representative 
personifications of the eighteenth century. The discrepancy between historical fact and  LSAT  827 
 artistic vision, useful in refuting the extreme deterministic position, merely forced th ese writers 
to seek a new formula that allowed them to preserve the desired identity between image and 
reality, this time a rather suspiciously psychic one: Watteau did not record the society he knew, 
but rather foresaw a society that developed shortly a fter his death.  
14. Which one of the following best describes the overall organization of the 
passage?  
(A) A particular phenomenon is discussed, the reasons that it is atypical are put 
forward, and these reasons are evaluated and refined . 
(B) An assumption  is made, results deriving from it are compared with what is 
known to be true, and the assumption is finally rejected as counterfactual . 
(C) A point of view is described, one hypothesis accounting for it is introduced 
and rejected, and a better hypothesis is offered for consideration . 
(D) A general characterization is offered, examples supporting it are introduced, 
and its special applicability to a particular group is asserted . 
(E) A particular viewpoint is explained, its shortcomings are discussed, and its 
persistence in the face of these is noted . 
15. The passage suggests that late -nineteenth -century biographers of Watteau 
considered the eighteenth century to be witty and amiable in large part because 
of 
(A) what they saw as Watteaus typical eighteenth -century talent for transcending 
reality through art  
(B) their opposition to the determinism that dominated late -nineteenth -century 
French thought  
(C) a lack of access to hi storical source material concerning the early eighteenth 
century in France  
(D) the nature of the image conveyed by the works of Watteau and his many 
imitators  
(E) their political bias in favor of aristocratic regimes and societies  
16. According to the passage, explanations of artistic production based on 
determinism were unthinkable to Watteau admirers for which one of the 
following reasons?  
(A) If such expl anations were widely accepted, too many people who would 
otherwise have admired Watteau would cease to appreciate Watteaus works . 
(B) If such explanations were adopted, they would make it difficult for Watteau 
admirers to explain why Watteaus works were purchased and admired by 
foreigners . 
(C) If such explanations were correct, many artists who, like Watteau, considered 
themselves French would have to excluded from histories of French art . 
(D) If such simple explanations were offered, other more complex a rguments 
concerning what made Watteaus works especially charming would go 828 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 unexplored . 
(E) If such explanations were true, Watteaus works would reflect a Flemish 
sensibility rather than the especially French one these admirers saw in 
them . 
17. The phrase curious blind spot (line 2 -3) can best be interpreted as referring to 
which one of the following?  
(A) some biographers persistent inability to appreciate what the author considers 
a particularly admirable equality  
(B) certain writers surprising  lack of awareness of what the author considers an 
obvious discrepancy  
(C) some writers willful refusal to evaluate properly what the author considers a 
valuable source of information about the past  
(D) an inexplicable tendency on the part of some writers  to undervalue an artist 
whom the author considers extremely influential  
(E) a marked bias in favor of a certain painter and a concomitant prejudice against 
contemporaries the author considers equally talented  
18. It can be inferred from the passage tha t the authors view of Watteaus works 
differs most significantly from that of most late -nineteen -century Watteau 
admirers in which one of the following ways?  
(A) Unlike most late -nineteenth -century Watteau admirers, the author appreciates 
the importance o f Watteaus artistic accomplishment . 
(B) The author finds Watteaus works to be much less lyrical and charming than 
did most late -nineteenth -century admirers of the works . 
(C) In contrast to most late -nineteenth -century Watteau admirers, the author finds 
it misleading to see Watteaus works as accurately reflecting social reality . 
(D) The author is much more willing to entertain deterministic explanations of the 
origins of Watteaus works than were most late -nineteenth -century Watteau 
admirers . 
(E) Unlik e most late -nineteenth -century admirers of Watteau, the author considers 
it impossible for any work of art to personify or represent a particular 
historical period . 
19. The author asserts that during the period of Watteaus artistic activity French 
society  was experiencing which one of the following?  
(A) widespread social upheaval caused by war  
(B) a pervasive sense of nostalgia for an idealized past  
(C) increased domination of public affairs by a powerful aristocracy  
(D) rapid adoption by the middle classe s of aristocratic manners and life -style  
(E) a need to reconcile the French self -image with French social realities  
20. The information given in the passage suggests that which one of the following  LSAT  829 
 principles accurately characterizes the relationship be tween an artists work and 
the impact it is likely to have on a society?  
(A) An artists recognition by society is most directly determined by the degree to 
which his or her works are perceived as lyrical and charming . 
(B) An artist will have the greatest influence on a society that values art 
particularly highly . 
(C) The works of an artist who captures the true and essential nature of a given 
society will probably have a great impact on that society . 
(D) The degree of influence an artists vision will have  on a society is conditional 
on the visibility of the artists work . 
(E) An artist who is much imitate by contemporaries will usually fail to have an 
impact on a society unless the imitators are talented . 
Faced with the problems of insufficient evidence , of conflicting evidence, and of evidence 
relayed through the flawed perceptual, retentive, and narrative abilities of witnesses, a jury is 
forced to draw inferences in its attempt to ascertain the truth. By applying the same cognitive 
tools they have dev eloped and used over a lifetime, jurors engage in the inferential exercise 
that lawyers call fact -finding. In certain decision -making contexts that are relevant to the trial 
of lawsuits, however, these normally reliable cognitive tools may cause jurors to commit 
inferential errors that distort rather than reveal the truth.  
Although juries can make a variety of  inferential errors, most of these mistakes in 
judgment involve the drawing of an unwarranted conclusion from the evidence, th at is, 
deciding that the evidence proves something that, in reality, it does not prove . For example, 
evidence that the defendant in a criminal prosecution has a prior conviction may encourage 
jurors to presume the defendants guilt, because of their precon ception that a person 
previously convicted of a crime must be inclined toward repeated criminal behavior. That 
commonly held belief is at least a partial distortion of reality; not all former convicts engage in 
repeated criminal behavior. Also, jury may gi ve more probative weight than objective analysis 
would allow to vivid photographic evidence depicting a shooting victims wounds, or may 
underestimate the weight of defense testimony that is not delivered in a sufficiently forceful or 
persuasive manner. Fi nally, complex or voluminous evidence might be so confusing to a jury 
that its members would draw totally unwarranted conclusions or even ignore the evidence 
entirely.  
Recent empirical research in cognitive psychology  suggests that people tend to commit 
inferential errors like these under certain predictable circumstances. By examining the available 
information, the situation, and the type of decision being made, cognitive psychologists can 
describe the kinds o f inferential errors a person or group is likely to make. These patterns of 
human decision -making may provide the courts with a guide to evaluating the effect of 
evidence on the reliability of the jurys inferential processes in certain situations.  
The not ion that juries can commit inferential errors that jeopardize the accuracy of the 
fact-finding process is not unknown to the courts. In fact, one of a presiding judge s duties is to 
minimize jury inferential error through explanation and clarification. Non etheless, most judges 
now employ only a limited and primitive concept of jury inferential error : limited  because it fails 830 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 to recognize the potential for error outside certain traditional situations , primitive because it 
ignores the research and conclusions  of psychologists in favor of notions about human 
cognition held by lawyers.  
21. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) When making decisions in certain predictable situations, juries may commit 
inferential errors that obscure rather than reveal the truth . 
(B) The views of human cognition taken by cognitive psychologists on the one 
hand and by the legal profession on the other are demonstrably dissimilar . 
(C) When confronting powerful preconceptions, particularly shockin g evidence, 
or complex, situation, jurors make errors in judgment . 
(D) The problem of inferential error by juries is typical of the difficulties with 
cognitive processes that people face in their everyday lives.  
(E) Juries would probably make more reliable decisions if cognitive psychologists, 
rather than judges, instructed them about the problems inherent in drawing 
unwarranted conclusions . 
22. Of the following hypothetical reforms in trial procedure, which o ne would the 
author be most likely to support as the best way to address the problem of jury 
inferential error?  
(A) a move away from jury trial  
(B) the institution of minimum formal educational requirements for jurors  
(C) the development of strict guidelin es for defense testimony  
(D) specific training for judges in the area of jury instruction  
(E) restrictions on lawyers use of psychological research  
23. In the second paragraph, the authors primary purpose is to  
(A) refute the idea that the fact -finding process is a complicated exercise  
(B) emphasize how carefully evidence must be presente d in order to avoid jury 
inferential error  
(C) explain how commonly held beliefs affect the jurys ability to ascertain the 
truth  
(D) provide examples of situations that may precipitate jury errors  
(E) recommend a method for minimizing mistakes by jurie s 
24. Which one of the following best describes the author s attitude toward the 
majority of judges today?  
(A) apprehensive about whether they are consistent in their instruction of juries  
(B) doubtful of their ability to draw consistently correct conclusi ons based on the 
evidence  
(C) critical of their failure to take into account potentially helpful research  
(D) pessimistic about their willingness to make significant changes in trial 
procedure   LSAT  831 
 (E) concerned about their allowing the presentation of complex and voluminous 
evidence in the courtroom  
25. Which one of the following statements, if true, would most seriously undermine 
the authors suggestion about the use of current psychological re search in the 
courtroom?  
(A) All guidelines about human behavior must take account of variations in the 
patterns of human decision -making . 
(B) Current models of how humans make decisions apply reliably to individuals 
but do not hold for decisions made by g roups . 
(C) The current conception of jury inferential error employed by judges has been 
in use for nearly a century . 
(D) Inferential errors can be more easily predicted in controlled situations such as 
the trial of lawsuits than in other kinds of decision -making processes . 
(E) In certain predictable circumstances, juries are less susceptible to inferential 
errors than they are in other circumstances . 
26. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to agree 
with which one of t he following generalizations about lawyers?  
(A) They have a less sophisticated understanding of human cognition than do 
psychologists . 
(B) They often present complex or voluminous information merely in order to 
confuse a jury . 
(C) They are no better at mak ing logical inferences from the testimony at a trial 
than are most judges . 
(D) They have worked to help judges minimize jury inferential error . 
(E) They are unrealistic about the ability of jurors to ascertain the truth . 
27. The author would be most likely to agree with which one of the following 
generalizations about a jurys decision -making process?  
(A) The more evidence that a jury has, the  more likely it is that the jury will reach 
a reliable verdict . 
(B) Juries usually overestimate the value of visual evidence such as photographs . 
(C) Jurors have preconceptions about the behavior of defendants that prevent 
them from making an objective ana lysis of the evidence in a criminal trial . 
(D) Most of the jurors who make inferential errors during a trial do so because 
they are unaccustomed to having to make difficult decisions based on 
inferences . 
(E) The manner in which evidence is presented to a jury may influence the jury 
either to overestimate or to underestimate the value of that evidence . 
LSAT   15    SECTION III  
Time  35 minutes  27 Questions  832 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 Directions: Each passage in this section is foll owed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the re sponse that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
It is a fundamental tenet of geophysics that the Earths magnetic field can exist in either of 
two polarity states: a normal state,  in which north -seeking compass needles point to the 
geographic north, and a reverse state, in which they point to the geographic south. 
Geological evidence shows that periodically the fields polarity reverses, and that these 
reversals have been taking place at an increasing rate. Evidence also indicates that the field 
does not reverse instantaneously from one polarity state to another; rather, the process 
involves a transition period that typically spans a few thousand years.  
Though this much is known, the underlying causes of the reversal phenomenon are not 
well understood. It is generally accepted that the magnetic field itself is generated by the 
motion of free electrons in the outer core, a slowly churning mass of molten metal sandwiched 
between the Earths mantle (the region of the Earths interior lying below the crust) and its solid 
inner core. In some way that is not completely understood, gravity and the Earths rotation, 
acting on temperature and density differences within the outer core fluid, provide the driving 
forces behind the generation of the field. The reversal phenomenon may be triggered when 
something disturbs the heat circulation pattern of the outer core fluid, and with it the magnetic 
field. 
Several explanations for this phenomenon h ave been proposed. One proposal, the 
heat -transfer hypothesis , is that the triggering process is intimately related to the way the 
outer core vents its heat into the mantle. For example, such heat transfer  could create hotter 
(rising) or cooler (descending)  blobs of material from the inner and outer boundaries of the 
fluid core, thereby perturbing the main heat -circulation pattern. A more controversial 
alternative proposal is the asteroid -impact hypoth esis. In this scenario an extended period of 
cold and darkness results from the impact of an asteroid large enough to send a great cloud of 
dust into the atmosphere. Following this climatic change, ocean temperatures drop and the 
polar ice caps grow, redis tributing the Earths seawater. This redistribution increases the 
rotational acceleration of the mantle, causing friction and turbulence near the outer 
core-mantle boundary and initiatin g reversal of the magnetic field.  
How well do these hypotheses account  for such observations as the long -term increase in 
the frequency of reversal? In support of the asteroid -impact model, it had been argued that the 
gradual cooling of the average ocean temperature would enable progressively smaller asteroid 
impacts (which are known to occur more frequently than larger impacts) to cool the Earths 
climate sufficiently to induce ice -cap growth and reversals. But theories that depend on 
extraterrestrial intervention seem less convincing than theories like the first, which acco unt for 
the phenomenon solely by means of the thermodynamic state of the outer core and its effect 
on the mantle.  
1. Which one of the following statements regarding the Earths outer core is best 
supported by information presented in the passage?  
(A) Heat circulation in the outer core controls the growth and diminution of the  LSAT  833 
 polar ice caps.  
(B) Impact of asteroids on the Earths surface alters the way in which the outer 
core vents its heat into the mantle.  
(C) Motion of electrons within the metallic fluid in the outer core produces the 
Earths magnetic field.  
(D) Friction and turbulence near the boundary between the outer core and the 
mantle are typically caused by asteroid impacts.  
(E) Cessation of heat circulation within the outer core brings on multip le reversals 
in the Earths magnetic field.  
2. The authors objection to the second hypothesis discussed in the passage is most 
applicable to which one of the following explanations concerning the extinction 
of the dinosaurs?  
(A) The extinction of the dino saurs was the result of gradual changes in the 
composition of the Earths atmosphere that occurred over millions of years.  
(B) The dinosaurs became extinct when their food supply was disrupted 
following the emergence of mammals.  
(C) The dinosaurs succumbed  to the new, colder environment brought about by a 
buildup of volcanic ash in the atmosphere.  
(D) After massively overpopulation the planet, dinosaurs disappeared due to 
widespread starvation and the rapid spread of disease.  
(E) After radical climatic c hanges resulted from the impact of a comet, dinosaurs 
disappeared from the Earth.  
3. The author mentions the creation of blobs of different temperatures in the Earths 
outer core (lines 34 -38) primarily in order to  
(A) present a way in which the venting of  heat from the outer core might disturb 
the heat -circulation pattern within the outer core  
(B) provide proof for the proposal that ventilation of heat f rom the outer core into 
the mantle triggers polarity reversal  
(C) give an example of the way in which he at circulates between the Earths outer 
core and the Earths exterior  
(D) describe how the outer core maintains its temperature by venting its excess 
heat into the Earth s mantle  
(E) argue in favor of the theory that heat circulation in the Earths inte rior 
produces the magnetic field  
4. Which one of the following statements regarding the polarity of the Earth s 
magnetic field is best supported by information in the passage?  
(A) Most, but not all, geophysicists agree that the Earths magnetic field may 
exist in two distinct polarity states.  
(B) Changes in the polarity of the Earths magnetic field have occurred more 
often in the recent past that in the distant past.  834 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (C) Heat transfer would cause reversals of the polarity of the Earths magnetic 
field to o ccur more quickly than would asteroid impact.  
(D) Geophysicists understanding of the reversal of the Earths magnetic field has 
increased significantly since the introduction of the heat -transfer hypothesis.  
(E) Friction near the boundary of the inner and outer cores brings on reversal of 
the polarity of the geomagnetic field . 
5. Which one of the following can be inferred regarding the two proposals discussed 
in the passage?  
(A) Since their introduction they have sharply divided the scientific community . 
(B) Both were formulated in order to explain changes in the frequency of polarity 
reversal.  
(C) Although no firm conclusions regarding them have yet been reached, both 
have been extensively investigated.  
(D) They are not the only proposals scientists hav e put forward to explain the 
phenomenon of polarity reversal.  
(E) Both were introduced some time ago and have since fallen into disfavor 
among geophysicists . 
6. The author mentions each of the following as possible contributing causes to 
reversals of th e Earths magnetic field EXCEPT  
(A) changes in the way heat circulates within the outer core fluid  
(B) extended periods of colder temperatures on the Earths surface  
(C) the creation of circulation blobs of outer core material of different 
temperatures  
(D) changes in circulation patterns in the Earths oceans  
(E) clouding of the Earths atmosphere by a large amount of dust  
Innovations in language are never completely new. When the words used for familiar 
things change, or words for new things enter the language, they are usually borrowed or 
adapted from sto ck. Assuming new roles, they drag their old meanings along behind them like 
flickering shadow. This seems especially true of the language of the contemporary school of 
literary criticism that now prefers to describe its work simply and rather presumptuousl y as 
theory  but is still popularly referred to as poststructuralism of deconstruction . 
The first neologisms adopted by this movement were signifier  and signified , employed to 
distinguish arbitrariness of the term we choose. The use of these particular term s (rather than, 
respectively, words  and thing) underlined the seriousness of the naming process and its claim 
on our attention. Since in English to signify can also mean to portend , these terms also 
suggest that words predict coming events.  
With the us e of the term deconstruction  we move into another and more complex realm of 
meaning. The most common use of the terms construction  and deconstruction  is in the building 
trades, and their borrowing by literary theorists for a new type of criticism cannot he lp but have 
certain overtones to the outsider. First, the usage  suggests that the creation and critical  LSAT  835 
 interpretation of literature are not organic but mechanical processes ; that the author of any 
piece of writing is not an inspired, intuitive artist, but  merely a laborer who cobbles existing 
materials (words) into more or less conventional structures. The term deconstruction  implies 
that the text has been put together like a building or a piece of machinery , and that it is in need 
of being taken apart, not so much in order to repair it as to demonstrate underlying 
inadequacies, false assumptions, and inherent contradictions. This process can supposedly be 
repeated many times and by many literary hard hats ; it is expected that each deconstruction  
will reveal additional flaws and expose the illusions or bad faith of the builder. The fact that 
deconstructionists prefer to describe their activities as deconstruction  rather than criticism  is 
also revealing. Criticism  and critic derive from the Greek Kritikos , skillful in judging, decisive. 
Deconstruction, on the other hand, has no overtones of skill or wisdom; it merely suggests 
demolition of an existing building. In popular usage criticism suggests censure b ut not change. 
If we find fault with a building, we may condemn it, but we do not carry out the demolition 
ourselves. The deconstructionist, by implication, is both judge and executioner who leaves a 
text totally dismantled, if not reduced to a pile of rub ble. 
7. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Implicit in the terminology of the school of criticism known as 
deconstruction  are meanings that reveal the true nature of the 
deconstructionists endeavor.  
(B) The appeara nce of the terms signifier  and signified  in the field of literary 
theory anticipated the appearance of an even more radical idea known as 
deconstruction . 
(C) Innovations in language and relations between old and new meanings of 
terms are a special concern of the new school of criticism known as 
deconstruction . 
(D) Deconstructionists maintain that it is insufficient merely to judge a work: the 
critic must actively dismantle it.  
(E) Progress in the field of literary theory is best achieved by looking for n ew 
terms like signifier  and deconstruction  that might suggest new critical 
approaches to a work.  
8. Which one of the following is a claim that the author of the passage makes about 
deconstructionists?  
(A) Deconstructionists would not have been able to form ulate their views 
adequately without the terms signifier  and signified . 
(B) Deconstructionists had no particular purpose in mind in choosing to use 
neologisms.  
(C) Deconstructionists do not recognize that their own theory contains inherent 
contradictions.  
(D) Deconstructionists find little interest in the relationship between words and 
their referents.  
(E) Deconstructionists use the terms signifier  and signified  to stress the 836 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 importance of the process of naming.  
9. Which one of the following generalizati ons about inventions is most analogous to 
the author s point about innovation in language ? 
(A) A new invention usually consists of components that are specifically 
manufactured for the new invention.  
(B) A new invention is usually behind the times, never m aking as much use of all 
the available modern technology as it could.  
(C) A new invention usually consists of components that are already available but 
are made to function in new ways.  
(D) A new invention is most useful when it is created with attention t o the 
historical tradition established by implements previously used to do the same 
job. 
(E) A new invention is rarely used to its full potential because it is surrounded by 
out-of-date technology that hinder its application.  
10. The author of the passa ge uses the word criticism in lines 46 -56 primarily in 
order to  
(A) give an example  
(B) introduce a contrast  
(C) undermine an argument  
(D) codify a system  
(E) dismiss an objection  
11. Which one of the following best describes the function of the secon d paragraph 
within the passage as a whole?  
(A) It introduces a hypothesis that the author later expands upon.  
(B) It qualifies a claim made earlier by the author.  
(C) It develops an initial example of the author s general thesis.  
(D) It predicts a developm ent. 
(E) It presents a contrasting view.  
12. The passage suggests that the author most probably holds the view that an 
important characteristic of literary criticism is that it  
(A) demonstrate false assumptions and inherent contradictions  
(B) employ skill a nd insight  
(C) be carried out by one critic rather than many  
(D) reve al how a text is put together like a building  
(E) point out the superiority of conventional text structures  
13. The passage suggests that which one of the following most accurately des cribes 
the authors view of deconstructionist thought?  
(A) The author is guardedly  optimistic about the ability of deconstruction to  LSAT  837 
 reveal the intentions and biases of a writer.  
(B) The author endorses the utility of deconstruction for revealing the role of 
older meanings of words . 
(C) The author is enthusiastic about the significant neologisms that 
deconstruction has introduced into literary criticism.  
(D) The author regards deconstructions tendency to focus only on the problems 
and faults of literary te xts as too mechanical.  
(E) The author condemns deconstructions attempts to define literary criticism as 
a creative act.  
(The following passage was written in 1986)  
The legislation  of a country rece ntly considered a bill designed to reduce the uncertainty 
inherent in the ownership of art by specifying certain conditions that must be met before an 
allegedly stolen work of art can be reclaimed by a plaintiff. The bill places the burden of proof in 
reclamation litigation entirely on the plaintiff, who must demonstrate that the holder of an item 
knew at the time of purchase that it had been stolen. Additionally, the bill creates a uniform 
national statute of limitations for reclamation of stolen cultural property.  
Testifying  in support of the bill, James D, Burke, a citizen of the country and one of its 
leading art museum directors, specially praised the inclusion of a statute of limitations; 
otherwise, he said, other countries could seek to reclai m valuable art objects, no matter how 
long they have been held by the current owner or how legitimately they were acquired. Any 
country could enact a patrimony law stating that anything ever made within the boundaries of 
that country is its cultural proper ty. Burke expressed the fear that lead to ruinous legal defense 
costs for museums.  
However, because such reclamation suits have not yet been a problem, there is little basis 
for Burkes concern. In fact, the proposed legislation would establish too many un justifiable 
barriers to the location and recovery of stolen objects. The main barrier is that the bill considers 
the announcement of an art transaction in a museum publication to be adequate evidence of an 
attempt to notify a possible owner. There are far too many such publications for the victim of a 
theft to survey, and with only this form of disclosure, a stolen object could easily remain 
unlocated even if assiduously searched for. Another stipulation requires that a purchaser show 
the object to a schola r for verification that it is not stolen, but it is a rare academic who is aware 
of any but the most publicized art thefts. Moreover, the time limit specified by the statute of 
limitations is very short, and the requirement that the plaintiff demonstrate t hat the holder had 
knowledge of the theft is unrealistic. Typically, stolen art changes hands several times before 
rising to the level in the marketplace where a curator or collector would see it. At that point, the 
object bears no trace of the initial tra nsaction between the thief and the first purchaser, 
perhaps the only one in the chain who knowingly acquired a stolen work of art.  
Thus, the need for new legislation to protect holders of art is not obvious. Rather, what is 
necessary is legislation remedyi ng the difficulties that legitimate owners of works of art, and 
countries from which such works have been stolen, have in locating and reclaiming these stolen 
works.  
14. Which one of the following most accurately summarizes the main point of the 838 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 passage?  
(A) Various legal disputes have recently arisen that demonstrate the need for 
legislation clarifying the legal position of museums in suits involving the 
repossession of cultural property.  
(B) A bill intended to prevent other governments from recovering cul tural 
property was recently introduced into the legislature of a country at the 
behest of its museum directors.  
(C) A bill intended to protect good -faith purchasers of wor ks of art from 
reclamation litigation is unnecessary and fails to address the needs o f 
legitimate owners attempting to recover stolen art works.  
(D) Clashes between museum professionals and members of the academic 
community regarding governmental legislation of the arts can best be 
resolved by negotiation and arbitration, not by litigation . 
(E) The desire of some governments to use legislation and litigation to recover 
cultural property stolen from their countries has led to abuses in international 
patrimony legislation.  
15. The uncertainty mentioned in line 2 of the passage refers to the  
(A) doubt that owners of works of art often harbor over whether individuals have 
a moral right to possess great art  
(B) concern that owners of works of art often have that their possession of such 
objects may be legally challenged at any time  
(C) question s that owners of works of art often have concerning the correct 
identification of the age and origin of their objects  
(D) disputes that often arise between cultural institutions vying for the 
opportunity to purchase a work of art  
(E) apprehension that owners of works of art often feel concerning the possibility 
that their objects may be damaged or stolen from them  
16. Which one of the following is an example of the kind of action that Burke feared 
would pose a serious threat to  museums in his country?  
(A) the passage of a law by another country forbidding the future export of any 
archaeological objects uncovered at sites within its territory  
(B) an international accord establishing strict criteria for determining whether a 
work of art can be considered stolen and specifying the circumstances under 
which it must be returned to its country of origin  
(C) the passage of a law by another country declaring that all objects created by 
its aboriginal people are the sole property of that country  
(D) an increase in the acquisition of culturally significant wor ks of art by private 
collectors, who are more capable than museums of bearing the cost of 
litigation but who rarely display their collections to the public  
(E) the recommendation of  a United Nations committee studying the problem of  LSAT  839 
 art theft that all international sales of cultural property be coordinated by a 
central regulatory body  
17. According to the passage, Burke envisaged the most formidable potential 
adversaries of his count rys museums in reclamation litigation to be  
(A) commercial dealers in art  
(B) law enforcement officials in his own country  
(C) governments of other countries  
(D) private collectors of art  
(E) museums in other countries  
18. The author suggests that in the country mentioned in line 1, litigation involving 
the reclamation of stolen works of art has been  
(A) less common than Burke fears it will become without passage of a national 
stature o f limitations for reclamation of stolen cultural property  
(B) increasing as a result of the passage of legislation that aids legitimate owners 
of art in their attempts to recover stolen works  
(C) a serious threat to museums and cultural institutions that h ave unwittingly 
added stolen artifacts to their collections  
(D) a signal of the legitimate frustrations of victims of at theft  
(E) increasing as a result of an increase in the amount of art theft  
19. Which one of the following best describes the authors attitude towards the 
proposed bill?  
(A) impassioned support  
(B) measured advocacy  
(C) fearful apprehension  
(D) reasoned oppo sition  
(E) reluctant approval  
20. Which one of the following best exemplifies the sort of legislation considered 
necessary by the author of the passage?  
(A) a law requiring museums to notify foreign governments and cultural 
institutions of all the catal ogs and scholarly journals that they publish  
(B) a law providing for the creation of a national warehouse for storage of works 
of art that are the subject of litigation  
(C) a law instituting a national fund for assisting museums to bear the expenses of 
defending themselves against reclamation suits  
(D) A law declaring invalid all sales of culture property during the last ten years 
by museums of one country to museums of another  
(E) A law requiring that a central archive be established for collecting and 
distributing information concerning all reported thefts of cultural property  840 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 Until recently, few historians were interested in analyzing the similarities and differences 
betwe en serfdom in Russia and slavery in the United States. Even Alexis de Tocqueville, who 
recognized the significant comparability of the two nations, never compared their systems of 
servitude, despite his interest in United States slavery. Moreover, the almo st simultaneous 
abolition of Russian serfdom and United States slavery in the 1860s a riveting coincidence that 
should have drawn more modern scholars to a comparative study of the two systems of 
servitude has failed to arouse the interest of scholars. Tho ugh some historians may have been 
put off  by the forbidding political differences between nineteenth -century Russia and the 
United States one an imperial monarchy, the other a federal democracy a recent study by 
Peter Kolchin identifies differences that ar e illuminatin g, especially with regard to the different 
kinds of rebellion exhibited by slaves and serfs.  
Kolchin points out that nobles owning serfs in Russia constituted only a tiny proportion of 
the population, while in the southern United States, about  a quarter of all White people were 
members of slave -owning families. And although in the southern United States only 2 percent 
of slaves worked on plantations where more than a hundred slaves worked, in Russia almost 80 
percent of the serfs worked for nob les who owned more than a hundred serfs. In Russia most 
serfs rarely saw their owners who tended to rely on intermediaries to manage their estates, 
while most southern planters lived on their land and interacted with slaves on a regular basis . 
These differ ences in demographics partly explain differences in the kinds of resistance that 
slaves and serfs practiced in their respective countries. Both serfs and slaves engaged in a wide 
variety of rebellious activity, from silent sabotage, much of which has escap ed the historical 
record, to organized armed rebellions, which were more common in Russia. The practice of 
absentee  ownership, combined with the large numbers in which serfs were owned, probably 
contributed significantly to the four great rebellions that s wept across Russia at roughly 
fifty-year intervals in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The last of these, occurring 
between 1773 and 1774, enlisted more than a million serfs in a futile attempt to overthrow the 
Russian nobility. Russian serfs also  participated in smaller acts of collective defiance called the 
volnenie , which typically started with a group of serfs who complained of grievances by petition 
and went out on strike . Confrontations between slaves and plantation authorities were also 
comm on, but they tended to be much less collective in nature than those that occurred in 
Russia, probably in part because the number of workers on each estate was smaller in the 
United States than was the case in Russia . 
21. Which one of the following best sta tes the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Differences in the demographics of United States slavery and Russian 
serfdom can help explain the different kinds of resistance practiced by slaves 
and serfs in their respective countries.  
(B) Historians have yet to un dertake an adequate comparison and contrast of 
Russian serfdom and United States slavery.  
(C) Revolts by Russian serfs were commonly characterized by collective action.  
(D) A recent study has questioned the value of comparing United States slavery to 
Russi an serfdom, especially in light of the significant demographic and 
cultural differences between the two countries.   LSAT  841 
 (E) De Tocqueville failed to recognize the fundamental differences between 
Russian serfdom and United States slavery which more recent historians 
have identified.  
22. According to the author, de Tocqueville was similar to many modern historians in 
his 
(A) interest in the demographic differences between Russia and the United States 
during the nineteenth century  
(B) failure to undertake a comparison of Russian serfdom and United States 
slavery  
(C) inability to explain why United States slavery and Russian  serfdom were 
abolished during the same decade  
(D) overestimation of the significance of the political differences between Russia 
and the United States  
(E) recognition of the essential comparability of Russia and the United States  
23. Which one of the following assertions, if true, would provide the most support for 
Kolchins principal conclusion regarding the relationship of demographics to 
rebellion  among Russian serfs and United States slaves?  
(A) Collective defiance by serfs during the nineteenth century was confined 
almost exclusively to their participation in the volnenie . 
(B) The rebellious activity of United States slaves was more likely to esc ape the 
historical record than was the rebellious activity of Russian serfs.  
(C) Organized rebellions by slaves in the Western Hemisphere during the 
nineteenth century were most common in colonies with large estates that 
normally employed more than a hundr ed slaves.  
(D) In the southern United States during the nineteenth century, those estates that 
were managed by intermediaries rather than by the owner generally relied 
upon the labor of at least a hundred slaves.  
(E) The intermediaries who managed estat es in Russia during the nineteenth 
century were in general much more competent as managers than the owners 
of the estates that they managed.  
24. The fact that United States slavery and Russian serfdom were abolished during 
the same decade is cited by the a uthor in the first paragraph primarily in order to  
(A) emphasize that rebellions in both countries eventually led to the demise of the 
two institutions  
(B) cite a coincidence that de Tocqueville should have been able to foresee  
(C) suggest one reason why m ore historians should have been drawn to a 
comparative study of the two institutions  
(D) cite a coincidence that Kolchin s study has failed to explain adequately  
(E) emphasize the underlying similarities between the two institutions  842 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 25. The author cites  which one of the following as a factor that might have 
discouraged historians from undertaking a comparative study of Russian serfdom 
and United States slavery?  
(A) major differences in the political systems of the two countries  
(B) major differences in t he demographics of the two countries  
(C) the failure of de Tocqueville to address the subject  
(D) differences in the size of the estates on which slaves and serfs labored  
(E) the comprehensiveness of Kolchins own work  
26. According to the passage, Kolchins study asserts that which one of the following 
was true of Russian nobles during the nineteenth century?  
(A) They agreed to the abolition of serfdom in the 1860s lar gely as a result of 
their having been influenced by the abolition of slavery in the United States.  
(B) They became more directly involved in the management of their estates as a 
result of the rebellions that occurred in the previous century.  
(C) They commo nly agreed to at least some of the demands that arose out of the 
volnenie . 
(D) They had relatively little direct contact with the serfs who worked on their 
estates.  
(E) They hastened the abolition of serfdom by failing to devise an effective 
response to the collective nature of the serfs rebellious activity.  
27. The passage suggests that which one of the following was true of southern 
planters in the United State s? 
(A) They were as prepared for collective protest as were their Russian 
counterparts.  
(B) Few of them owned plantations on which fewer than a hundred slaves 
worked . 
(C) They managed their estates more efficiently than did their Russian 
counterparts.  
(D) Few of them relied on intermediaries to manage their estates.  
(E) The size of their estates was larger on average than the size of Russian estates.  
LSAT   16    SECTION I  
Time  35 minutes  27 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what i s stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, a nd 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
Until the 1980s, most scientists believed that noncatastrophic geological processes caused 
the extinction of dinosaurs that occurred approximately 66 million years ago, at the end of the  LSAT  843 
 Cretaceous p eriod. Geologists argued that a dramatic drop in sea level coincided with the 
extinction of the dinosaurs and could have caused  the climatic changes that resulted in this 
extinction as well as the extinction of many ocean species.  
This view was seriously c hallenged in the 1980s by the discovery of large amounts of 
iridium in a layer of clay deposited at the end of the Cretaceous period. Because iridium is 
extremely rare in rocks on the Earths surface but common in meteorites, researchers theorized 
that it was the impact of a large meteorite that dramatically changed the earths climate and 
thus triggered the extinction of the dinosaurs.  
Currently available evidence, however, offers more support for a new theory, the 
volcanic -eruption theory. A vast eruption  of lava in India coincided with the extinctions that 
occurred at the end of the Cretaceous period, and the release of carbon dioxide from this 
episode of volcanism could have caused the climatic change responsible for the demise o f the 
dinosaurs. Such out pourings of lava are caused by instability in the lowest la yer of the Earths 
mantle, located just above the Earths core. As the rock that constitutes this layer is heated by 
the Earths core, it becomes less dense and portions of it eventually escape upw ard as blobs or 
molten rock, called  diapirs , that can, under certain circumstances, erupt violently through the 
Earths crust.  
Moreover, the volcanic -eruption theory, like the impact theory, accounts for the presence 
of iridium in sedimentary deposits; it also explains matters that th e meteorite -impact theory 
does not. Although iridium is extremely rare on the Earths surface, the lower regions of the 
Earths mantle have roughly the same composition as meteorites and contain large amounts o f 
iridium, which  in the case of a diapir erupt ion would  probably be emitted as iridium hexafluoride, 
a gas that would disperse more uniformly in the atmosphere than the iridium -containing matter 
thrown out from a meteorite impact. In addition, the volcanic -eruption theory may explain why 
the end of th e Cretaceous period was marked by a gradual change in sea level. Fossil records 
indicate that for several hundred thousand years prior to the relatively sudden disappearance of 
the dinosaurs, the level of the sea gradually fell, causing many marine organis ms to die out . 
This change in sea level might well have been the result of a distortion in the Earths surface 
that resulted from the movement of diapirs upward toward the Earths crust, and the more 
cataclysmic extinction of the dinosaurs could have resul ted from the explosive volcanism that 
occurred as material from the diapirs erupted onto the Earths surface.  
1. The passage suggests that during the 1980s researchers found meteorite impact a 
convincing explanation for the extinction of dinosaurs , in part  because  
(A) earlier theories had failed to account for the gradual extinction of many ocean 
species at the end of the Cretaceous period  
(B) geologists had, up until that time, underestimated the amount of carbon 
dioxide that would be released during an ep isode of explosive volcanism  
(C) a meteorite could have served as a source of the iridium found in a layer of 
clay deposited at the end of the Cretaceous period  
(D) no theory relying on purely geological processes had, up until that time, 
explained the cau se of the precipitous drop in sea level that occurred at the 
end of the Cretaceous period  844 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (E) the impact of a large meteorite could have resulted in the release of enough 
carbon dioxide to cause global climatic change  
2. According to the passage, the lower regions of the Earths mantle are 
characterized by  
(A) a composition similar to that of meteorites  
(B) the absence of elements found in rocks on the Earths crust  
(C) a greater stability than that of the upper regions  
(D) the presence of large amounts of carbon dioxide  
(E) a uniformly lower density than that of the upper regions  
3. It can be inferred from the passage that which one of the following was true of 
the lava that erupted in India at the end of the Cretaceous period?  
(A) It contained less carbon dioxide than did the meteorites that were striking the 
Earths surface during that period.  
(B) It was more dense than the molten rock, located just above the Earths core.  
(C) It released enough iridium hexafluoride into the atmosphere to change the 
Earths climate dramatically.  
(D) It was richer in iridium than rocks usually found on th e Earths surface.  
(E) It was richer in iridium than were the meteorites that were striking the Earths 
surface during that period.  
4. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with doing which one of the 
following?  
(A) describing three theories  and explaining why the latest of these appears to be 
the best of the three  
(B) attacking the assumptions inherent in theories that until the 1980s had been 
largely accepted by geologists  
(C) outlining the inadequacies of three different explanations of th e same 
phenomenon  
(D) providing concrete examples in support of the more general assertion that 
theories must often be revised in light of new evidence  
(E) citing evidence that appears to confirm the skepticism of geologists regarding 
a view held prior to the 1980s  
5. The author implies that if the theory described in the third paragraph is true, 
which one of the following would have been true of irid ium in the atmosphere at 
the end of the Cretaceous period?  
(A) Its level of concentration in the Earths atmosphere would have been high due 
to a slow but steady increase in the atmospheric iridium that began in the 
early Cretaceous period.  
(B) Its concent ration in the Earths atmosphere would have increased due to the 
dramatic decrease in sea level that occurred during the Cretaceous period.   LSAT  845 
 (C) It would have been directly responsible for the extinction of many ocean 
species.  
(D) It would have been more un iformly dispersed than iridium whose source had 
been the impact of a meteorite on the Earths surface.  
(E) It would have been more uniformly dispersed than indium released into the 
atmosphere as a result of normal geological processes that occur on Eart h. 
6. The passage supports which one of the following claims about the 
volcanic -eruption theory?  
(A) It does not rely on assumptions concerning the temperature of molten rock at 
the lowest pan of the Earths mantle.  
(B) It may explain what caused the gradu al fall in sea level that occurred for 
hundreds of thousands of years prior to the more sudden disappearance of 
the dinosaurs.  
(C) It bases its explanation on the occurrence of periods of increased volcanic 
activity similar to those shown to have caused ea rlier mass extinctions.  
(D) It may explain the relative scarcity of iridium in rocks on the Earths surface 
compared to its abundance in meteorites.  
(E) It accounts for the relatively uneven distribution of iridium in the layer of clay 
deposited at the end of the Cretaceous period.  
7. Which one of the following, if true, would cast the most doubt on the theory 
described in the last paragraph of the passage?  
(A) Fragments of meteorites that have struck the Earth are examined and found to 
have only minuscu le amounts of iridium hexafluoride trapped inside of 
them.  
(B) Most diapir eruptions in the geological history of the Earth have been similar 
in size to the one that occurred in India at the end of the Cretaceous period 
and have not been succeeded by perio ds of climatic change.  
(C) There have been several periods in the geological history of the Earth, before 
and after the Cretaceous period, during which large numbers of marine 
species have perished.  
(D) The frequency with which meteorites struck the Earth was higher at the end 
of the Cretaceous period than at the beginning of the period.  
(E) Marine species tend to be much more vulnerable to extinction when exposed 
to a dramatic and relatively sudden change in sea level than when they are 
exposed to a gradual change in sea level similar to the one that preceded the 
extinction of the din osaurs.  
It has become something of a truism in folklore studies that until recently the lore was 
more often studied than the folk. That is, folklorists concentrated on the folklore the songs, 
tales, and proverbs themselves and ignored the people who transm itted that lore as part of 
their oral culture. However, since the early 1970s, folklore studies have begun to regard folk 
performers as people of creativity who are as worthy of attention as are artists who transmit 846 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 their ideas in writing. This shift of em phasis has also encouraged a growing interest in women 
folk performers.  
Until recently, folklorists tended to collect folklore from women on only a few topics such as 
health and games. In other areas, as Weigle and Farrer have noted, if folklorists had a choice 
between a story as told by a man or as told by a woman, the mans version was chosen. It is 
still too early to tell how profoundly this situation has changed, but one can point to several 
recent studies in which women performers play central roles.  Perhaps more telling is the focus 
of the most recently published major folklore textbook, The Dynamics of Folklore . Whereas 
earlier textbooks gave little attention to women and their folklore, this book devotes many 
pages to women folk performers.  
Recogni tion of women as important bearers of folklore is not entirely a recent phenomenon. 
As early as 1903, a few outstanding women folk performers were the focus of scholarly 
attention. Bur the scholarship devoted to these women tended to focus primarily on pre senting 
the performers repertoire. Recent works about women folk artists, however, have been more 
biographically oriented. Juha Pentika inens study of Marina Tokalo, a Finnish healer and 
narrator of folktales, is especially extensive and probing. Though i nterested in the problems of 
repertoire analysis, Pentikainen gives considerable attention to the details of Tokalos life and 
cultural background, so that a full picture of a woman and her folklore emerges. Another 
notable work is Roger Abrahams book, wh ich presents a very clear picture of the significance of 
traditional singing in the life of noted ballad singer Almeda Riddle. Unfortunately, unlike 
Pentikainens study, Abrahams study contains little repertoire analysis.  
These recent books reflect the cu rrent interest of folklorists in viewing folklore in context 
and thus answering questions about what folklore means to the people who use it. One 
unexpected result of this line of study has been the discovery that women may use the same 
folklore that men u se, but for very different purposes. This realization has potential importance 
for future folklore studies in calling greater attention to the type of study required i f a folklorist 
wants truly to understand the role folklore plays in a particular culture.  
8. Which one of the following best describes the main point of the passage?  
(A) It is only since the early 1970s that folklore studies have begun to recognize 
women as important bearers of folklore.  
(B) A careful analysis of the repertoires of women folk performers has led to a 
new discovery with important implications for future folklore studies.  
(C) Recent studies of women folk performers have focused primarily on the 
problems of repertoire analysis to the exclusion of a discussion of the culture 
within which the folklore was developed.  
(D) The emphasis in folklore studies has shifted from a focus on the life and the 
cultural background of the folk performers themselves to a broader 
understanding of the role folklore plays in a culture.  
(E) A change in the focus of folklore studies has led to increased interest in 
women folk performers and to a new understanding of the importance of the 
context in which folklore is produced.  
9. The author of the passage refers to The Dynamics of Folkl ore primarily in order  LSAT  847 
 to 
(A) support the idea that it is too soon to tell whether or not folklorists are giving 
greater attention to womens folklore  
(B) refute Weigle and Farrers contention that folklorists prefer to collect folklore 
from men rather tha n from women  
(C) support the assertion that scholarship devoted to women folk performers 
tends to focus primarily on repertoire  
(D) present an example of the new emphasis in folklore studies on the performer 
rather than on the folklore  
(E) suggest that there are some signs that women folk performers are gaining 
increased critical attention in the field of folklore  
10. The focus of which one of the following books would most clearly reflect the 
current interest of the folklorists ment ioned in the last paragraph?  
(A) an anthology of tales and songs collected exclusively from women in 
different cultures  
(B) a compilation of tales and songs from both men and women covering a great 
variety of traditional and nontraditional topics  
(C) a stu dy of the purpose and meaning of a tale or song for the men and women 
in a particular culture  
(D) an analysis of one particular tale or song that documents changes in the text 
of the folklore over a period of time  
(E) a comparison of the creative process of performers who transmit folklore with 
that of artists who transmit their ideas in writing  
11. According to the passage, which one of the following changes has occurred in the 
field of folklore since the early  1970s?  
(A) increased recognition of the similar ways in which men and women use 
folklore  
(B) increased recognition of folk performers as creative individuals  
(C) increased emphasis on the need for repertoire analysis  
(D) less emphasis on the relationship between cultural influences and folklore  
(E) less emphasis on the individual performers and more emphasis on the 
meaning of folklore to a culture  
12. It can be inferred from the passage that early folklorists assumed that which one 
of the following was true?  
(A) The people who transmitted the  folklore did not play a creative role in the 
development of that folklore.  
(B) The people who transmitted the folklore were not consciously aware of the 
way in which they creatively shaped that folklore.  
(C) The text of a song or tale did not change as th e folklore was transmitted from 848 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 one generation to another.  
(D) Women were not involved in transmitting folklore except for songs or tales 
dealing with a few traditional topics.  
(E) The meaning of a piece of folklore could differ depending on whether the tale 
or song was transmitted by a man or by a woman.  
13. Based on the information in the passage, which one of the following is most 
closely analogous to the type of folklore studies produced before the early 1970s?  
(A) An anthropologist studies the implements currently used by an isolated 
culture, but does not investigate how the people of that culture designed and 
used those implements.  
(B) A manufacturer hires a consultant t o determine how existing equipment in a 
plant might be modified to improve efficiency, but does not ask employees 
for their suggestions on how to improve efficiency.  
(C) A historian studies different types of documents dealing with a particular 
historical event, but decides not to review newspaper accounts written by 
journalists who lived through that event.  
(D) An archaeologist studies the artifacts of an ancient culture to reconstruct the 
life-style of that culture, but does not actually visit the site wh ere those 
artifacts were unearthed . 
(E) An architect designs a private home for a client, but ignores many of the 
clients suggestions concerning minor details about the final design of the 
home . 
14. The author of the passage uses the term context (line 50) to refer to  
(A) a holistic a ssessment of a piece of folklore rather than a critical analysis of its 
parts  
(B) a study that examines a piece of folklore in light of earlier interpretations 
provided by other folklorists  
(C) the parts of a piece of folklore that can shed light on the me aning of the entire 
piece  
(D) the environment and circumstances in which a particular piece of folklore is 
used 
(E) the location in which the story line of a piece of folklore is set  
15. The author s attitude toward Roger Abrahams book can best be described as one 
of 
(A) wholehearted approval  
(B) qualified admiration  
(C) uneasy ambivalence  
(D) extreme skepticis m 
(E) trenchant criticism   LSAT  849 
 J. G. A. Pococks numerous investigations have all revolved around the fruitful assumption 
that a work of political thought can only be understood in light of the linguistic constraints to 
which its author was subject, for thes e prescribed both the choice of subject matter and the 
authors conceptualization of this subject matter. Only the occasional epic theorist, like 
Machiavelli or Hobbes, succeeded in breaking out of these bonds by redefining old terms and 
inventing new ones . The task of the modern commentator is to identify the language or 
vocabulary with and within which the author operated. While historians of literature have 
always been aware that writers work within particular traditions, the application of this noti on 
to the history of political ideas forms a sharp contrast to the assumptions of the 1950s, when it 
was naively thought that the close reading of a text by an analytic philosopher was sufficient to 
establish its meaning, even if the philosopher had no kno wledge of the period of the texts 
composition.  
The language Pocock has most closely investigated is that of civic humanism . For much 
of his career he has argued that eighteenth -century English political thought should be 
interpreted as a conflict betwee n rival versions of the virtue central to civic humanism. On the 
one hand, he argues, this virtue is described by representatives of the Tory opposition using a 
vocabulary of public spirit  and self -sufficiency. For these writers the societal ideal is the small, 
independent landowner in the countryside. On the other hand, Whig writers describe such 
virtue using a vocabulary of commerce and economic progress; for them the ideal is the 
merchant.  
In making such linguistic discriminations Po cock has disassociated  himself from historians 
like Namier, who deride all eighteenth -century English political language as cant. But while 
Pococks ideas have proved fertile when applied to England, they are more controversial when 
applied to the late -eighteenth -century United States. Pococks assertion that Jeffersons attacks 
on the commercial policies of the Federalists simply echo the language of the Tory opposition in 
England is at odds with the fact that Jefferson rejected the elitist implications of that groups 
notion of virtue and asserted the right of all to participate in commercial society. Indeed, after 
promptings by Quentin Skinner , Pocock has admitted that a counterlanguage one of rights 
and liberties was probably as important in the politi cal discourse of the 
late-eighteenth -century United States as the language of civic humanism. Fortunately, it is not 
necessary to rank the relative importance of all the different vocabularies in which 
eighteenth -century political argument was conducted. I t is sufficient to recognize that any 
interesting text is probably a mixture of several of these vocabularies, and to applaud the 
historian who, though guilty of some exaggeration, has done the most to make us aware of 
their importance.  
16. The main idea o f the passage is that  
(A) civic humanism, in any of its manifestations, cannot entirely explain 
eighteenth -century political discourse  
(B) eighteenth -century political texts are less likely to reflect a single vocabulary 
than to combine several vocabularie s 
(C) Pococks linguistic approach, though not applicable to all eighteenth -century 
political texts, provides a useful model for historians of political theory  
(D) Pocock has more successfully accounted for the nature of political thought in 850 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 eighteenth -century England than in the eighteenth -century United States  
(E) Pococks notion of the importance of language in political texts is a logical 
extension of the insights of historians of literature  
17. According to the passage, Pocock most clearly associate s the use of a vocabulary 
of economic progress with  
(A) Jefferson  
(B) Federalists  
(C) English Whigs  
(D) English Tories rural  
(E) English landowners  
18. The authors attitude toward Pocock is best revealed by which of the following 
pairs of words?  
(A) f ruitful (line 2) and cant (line 39)  
(B) sharp (line 16) and elitist (line 46)  
(C) naively (line 17) and controversial (line 41)  
(D) fertile (line 40) and applaud (line 60)  
(E) simply (line 44) and importance (line 55)  
19. The passage suggests that one of the assumptions of the 1950s (line 17) 
regarding the meaning of a political text was that this meaning  
(A) could be established using an approach similar to that used by literary 
historians  
(B) could be definitively established witho ut reference to the texts historical 
background  
(C) could be closely read in several different ways depending on ones 
philosophic approach  
(D) was constrained by certain linguistic preconceptions held by the texts author  
(E) could be expressed most clearly by an analytic philosopher who had studied 
its historical context  
20. The author of the passage would most likely agree that which one of the 
following is a weakness found in Pococks work?  
(A) the use of the term l anguage to describe the expressive features of several 
diverse kinds of discourse  
(B) the overemphatic denigration of the role of the analytic philosopher in 
establishing the meaning of a political, or indeed any, text  
(C) the emphasis on the overriding i mportance of civic humanism in 
eighteenth -century English political thought  
(D) the insistence on a single linguistic dichotomy to account for political thought 
in eighteenth -century England and the United States   LSAT  851 
 (E) the assignment of certain vocabularies to particular parties in 
eighteenth -century England without taking note of how these vocabularies 
overlapped  
21. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A description of a thesis is offered, specific cases are considered, and an 
evaluation is given.  
(B) A thesis is brought forward, the thesis is qualified, and evidence that calls the 
qualification into question is stated.  
(C) A hypothesis is described, examples that sugges t it is incorrect are 
summarized, and supporting examples are offered.  
(D) A series of evaluations are given, concrete reasons are put forward, and a 
future direction for research is suggested.  
(E) Comparisons and contrasts are made, some categories of evaluation are 
suggested, and a framework for applying these categories is implied.  
In 1964 the United States federal government began attempts to eliminate racial 
discrimination in employment and wages: the United States Congress enacted Title VII of the 
Civil Rights Act, prohibiting employers from making employment decisions on the basis of race. 
In 1965 President Johnson issued Executive Order 11,246, which prohibited discrimination by 
United  States government contractors and emphasized direct monitoring of minority 
representation in contractors work forces.  
Nonetheless, proponents of the continuous change hypothesis believe that United States 
federal law had a marginal impact on the econom ic progress made by black people in the 
United States between 1940 and 1975. Instead they emphasize slowly evolving historical forces, 
such as long -term trends in education that improved segregated schools for black students 
during the 1940 s and were opera tive during and after the 1960s. They argue that as the quality 
of black schools improved relative to that of white schools, the earning potential of those 
attending black schools increased relative to the earning potential of those attending white 
schools . 
However, there is no direct evidence linking increased quality of underfunded segregated 
black schools to these improvements in earning potential. In fact, even the evidence on relative 
schooling quality is ambiguous. Although in the mid -1940s term lengt h at black schools was 
approaching that in white schools , the rapid growth in another important measure of school 
quality, school expenditures, may be explained by increases in teachers salaries, and 
historically, such increases have not necessarily incre ased school quality. Finally, black 
individuals in all age groups, even those who had been educated at segregated schools before 
the 1940s, experienced post -1960 increases in their earning potential. If improvements in the 
quality of schooling were an impo rtant determin ant of increased returns, only those workers 
who could have benefited from enhanced school quality should have received higher returns. 
The relative improvement in the earning potential of educated black people of all age groups in 
the United  States is more consistent with a decline in employment discrimination.  
An additional problem for continuity theorists is how to explain the rapid acceleration of 
black economic progress in the United States after 1964. Education alone cannot account for 852 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 the rate of change. Rather, the coincidence of increased United States government 
antidiscrimination pressure in the mid -1960s with the acceleration in the rate of black economic 
progress beginning in 1965 argues against the continuity theorists view. True , correlating  
federal intervention and the acceleration of black economic progress might be incorrect. One 
could argue that changing altitudes about employment discrimination sparked both the 
adoption of new federal policies and the rapid acceleration in b lack economic progress. Indeed, 
the shift in national attitude that made possible the enactment of Title VII was in part produced 
by the persistence of racial discrimination in the southern United States. However, the fact that 
the law had its greatest eff ect in the South, in spite of the vigorous resistance of many Southern 
leaders, suggests its importance for black economic progress.  
22. According to the passage, Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act differs from 
Executive Order 11. 246 in that Title VII  
(A) monitors employers to ensure minority representation  
(B) assesses the work forces of government contractors  
(C) eliminates discriminatory disparities in wages  
(D) focuses on determining minority representation in government  
(E) governs hiring practices in a wider variety of workplaces  
23. Which one of the following statements about schooling  in the United States 
during the mid -1940s can be inferred from the passage?  
(A) School expenditures decreased for white schools.  
(B) The teachers in white schools had more time to cover material during a school 
year than did teachers in black schools.  
(C) The basic curriculum of white schools was similar to the curriculum at black 
schools.  
(D) White schools did not change substantially  in quality.  
(E) Although the salaries of teachers in black schools increased, they did not keep 
pace with the salaries of teachers in white schools.  
24. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) explain why an argument about black economic progress is incomplet e 
(B) describe the impact of education on black economic progress  
(C) refute an argument about the factors influencing black economic progress  
(D) describe black economic progress before and after the 1960s  
(E) clarify the current view about the factors  influencing black economic progress  
25. Which one of the following best states the position of proponents of the 
continuous change hypothesis regarding the relationship between law and racial 
discrimination?  
(A) Individuals cannot be forced by legal mea ns to behave in nondiscriminatory 
ways.  
(B) Discriminatory practices in education have been effectively altered by legal  LSAT  853 
 means.  
(C) Legislation alone has had little effect on racially discriminatory behavior.  
(D) Legislation is necessary, but not sufficien t, to achieve changes in racial 
altitudes.  
(E) Legislation can only exacerbate conflicts about racially discriminatory 
behavior.  
26. The author concedes that correlating federal intervention and the acceleration of 
black economic progress might be inco rrect (lines 58 -60) primarily in order to  
(A) strengthen the overall argument by anticipating an objection  
(B) introduce another factor that may have influenced black economic progress  
(C) concede a point to the continuity theorists  
(D) change the overall  argument in light of the views of the continuity theorists  
(E) introduce a discussion about the impact of federal intervention on 
discrimination  
27. The continuous change hypothesis, as it is presented in the passage, can best be 
applied to which one of the following situations?  
(A) Homes are found for many low -income families because the government 
funds a project to build subsidized housing in an economically depressed 
area.  
(B) A depressed economy does not cause the closing of small businesses in a local 
community because the  government provides special grants to aid these 
businesses.  
(C) Unemployed people are able to obtain jobs because private contractors 
receive tax incentives for constructing office buildings in an area with a high 
unemployment rate.  
(D) A housing shortage  is remedied because the changing state of the economy 
permits private investors to finance construction in a depressed area.  
(E) A communitys sanitation needs are met because neighborhood organizations 
lobby aggressively for government assistance.  
LSAT   17    SECTION I  
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions  to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
For the poet Philips Whitely, who was brought to colonial New England as a slave in 1761, 
the formal literary code of eighteenth -century English was thrice remov ed: by the initial barrier 
of the unfamiliar English language, by the discrepancy between spoken and literary forms of 854 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 English, and by the African tradition of oral rather than written verbal art. Wheatley 
transcended these barriers she learned the English  language and English literary forms so 
quickly and well that she was composing good poetry in English within a few years of her arrival 
in New England.  
Wheatleys experience exemplifies the meeting of oral and written literary cultures. The 
aesthetic prin ciples of the African oral tradition were preserved in America by folk artists in work 
songs , dancing, field hollers, religious music, the use of the drum, and, after the drum was 
forbidden, in the perpetuation of drum effects in song. African languages an d the functions of 
language in African societies not only contributed to the emergence of a distinctive Black 
English but also exerted demonstrable effects on the manner in which other Americans spoke 
English. Given her African heritage and her facility wi th English and the conventions of English 
poetry , Wheatleys work had the potential to apply the ideas of a written literature to an oral 
literary tradition in the creation of an African American literary language.  
But this was a potential that her poetry unfortunately did not exploit. The standards of 
eighteenth -century English poetry, which itself reflected little of the American language, led 
Wheatley to develop a notion of poetry as a closed system, derived from imitation of earlier 
written works. No pl ace existed for the rough -and-ready  Americanized English she heard in the 
streets, for the English spoken by Black people, or for Africanisms. The conventions of 
eighteenth -century neoclassical poetry ruled out casual talk; her choice and feeling s had to be 
generalized according to rules of poetic diction and characterization; the particulars of her 
African past, if they were to be dealt with at all, had to be subordinated to the reigning 
conventions. African poetry did not count as poetry in her new situation, and African aesthetic 
canons were irrelevant to the new context because no linguistic or social framework existed to 
reinforce them. Wheatley adopted a foreign language and a foreign literary tradition; they were 
not extensions of her past e xperience, but replacements.  
Thus limited by the eighteenth -century English literary code, Wheatleys poetry contributed 
little to the development of a distinctive African American literary language. Yet by the 
standards of the literary conventions in whic h she chose to work, Wheatleys poetry is 
undeniably accomplished, and she is justly celebrated as the first Black American poet.  
1. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Folk artists employed more principles of Africa n oral tradition in their works 
than did Phillis Wheatley in her poetry.  
(B) Although Phillis Wheatley had to overcome significant barriers in learning 
English, she mastered the literary conventions of eighteen -century English as 
well as African aesthetic canons.  
(C) Phillis Wheatleys poetry did not fulfill the potential inherent in her 
experience but did represent a significant accomplishment.  
(D) The evolution of a distinctive African American literary language can be 
traced from the creations of African  American folk artists to the poetry of 
Phillis Wheatley.  
(E) Phillis Wheatley joined with African American folk artists in preserving the 
principles of the African oral tradition.   LSAT  855 
 2. The approach to poetry taken by a modern -day Italian immigrant in Ame rica 
would be most analogous to Phillis Wheatleys approach, as it is described in the 
passage, if the immigrant  
(A) translated Italian literary forms into the American idiom  
(B) combined Italian and American literary traditions into a new form of poetic 
expression  
(C) contributed to the development of a distinctive Italian American literary style  
(D) defined artistic expression in terms of eighteenth -century Italian poetic 
conventions  
(E) adopted the language and forms of modern American poetry  
3. According to the passage, African languages had a notable influence on  
(A) the religious music of colonists in New England  
(B) the folk art of colonists in New England  
(C) formal written E nglish  
(D) American speech patterns  
(E) eighteen -century aesthetic principles  
4. By a closed system of poetry (line  34-35), the author most probably means 
poetry that  
(A) cannot be written by those who are not raised knowing its conventions  
(B) has li ttle influence on the way language is actually spoken  
(C) substitutes its own conventions for the aesthetic principles of the past  
(D) does not admit the use of street language and casual talk  
(E) is ultimately rejected because its conventions leave lit tle room for further 
development  
5. According to the passage, the standards of eighteenth century English poetry 
permitted Wheatley to include which one of the following in her poetry?  
(A) generalized feelings  
(B) Americanized English  
(C) themes from folk art 
(D) casual talk  
(E) Black speech  
6. Which one of the following, if true, would most weaken the authors argument 
concerning the role that Wheatley played in the evolution of an African American 
literary language?  
(A) Wheatleys poetry was admired in England for its fa ithfulness to the 
conventions of neoclassical poetry.  
(B) Wheatley compiled a history in English of her familys experiences in Africa 
and America . 856 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (C) The language barriers that Wheatley overcame were eventually transcended 
by all who were brought from Af rica as slaves.  
(D) Several modern African American poets acknowledge the importance of 
Wheatleys poetry to American literature . 
(E) Scholars trace themes and expressions in African American poetry back to the 
poetry of Wheatley.  
7. It can be inferred that the author of the passage would most probably have praised 
Phillis Wheatleys poetry more if it had  
(A) affected the manner in which slaves and freed Black people spoke English  
(B) defined African American artistic expression in terms of earlier works  
(C) adopted the standards of eighteenth -century English poetry  
(D) combined elements of the English literary tradition with thos e of the African 
oral tradition  
(E) focused on the barriers that written English literary forms presented to Black 
artists  
8. Which one of the following most accurately characterizes the authors attitude 
with respect to Phillis Wheatleys literary accomplishments?  
(A) enthusiastic a dvocacy  
(B) qualified admiration  
(C) dispassionate impartiality  
(D) detached ambivalence  
(E) perfunctory dismissal  
One scientific discipline, during its early stages of development, is often related to another 
as an antithesis to its thesis. The thesis discipline tend to concern itself with discovery and 
classification of phenomena, to offer holistic explanations emphasizing pattern and form, and to 
use existing theory to explain the widest possible range of phenomena. The paired or 
antidiscipline, on th e other hand, can be characterized by a more focused approach, 
concentrating on the units of construction, and by a belief that the discipline can be 
reformulated in terms of the issues and explanations of the antidiscipline.  
The relationship of cytology ( cell biology) to biochemistry in the late nineteenth century, 
when both disciplines were growing at a rapid pace, exemplifies such a pattern. Researchers in 
cell biology found mounting evidence of an intricate cell architecture. They also deduced the 
myste rious choreography of the chromosomes during cell division. Many biochemists, on the 
other hand, remained skeptical of the idea that so much structure existed, arguing that the 
chemical reactions that occur in cytological preparations might create the appe arance of such 
structures.  Also, they stood apart from the debate then raging over whether protoplasm, the 
complex of living material within a cell, is homogeneous, networklike, granular, or foamlike. 
Their interest lay in the core fundamental issues of the chemical nature of protoplasm, 
especially the newly formulated enzyme theory of life.  
In general, biochemists judged cytologists to be too ignorant of chemistry to grasp the  LSAT  857 
 basic processes, whereas cytologists considered the methods of biochemists ina dequate to 
characterize the structures of the living cell. The renewal of Mendelian genetics and, later, 
progress in chromosome mapping did little at first to effect a synthesis.  
Both sides were essentially correct . Biochemistry has more than justified its  extravagant 
early claims by explaining so much of the cellular machinery. But in achieving this feat  (mostly 
since 1950)  it has been partially transformed into the new discipline of molecular 
biology biochemistry that deals with spatial arrangements and m ovements of large molecules. 
At the same time cytology has metamorphosed into modern cellular biology. Aided by electron 
microscopy, it has become more similar in language and outlook to molecular biology. The 
interaction of a discipline and its antidiscip line has moved both sciences toward a synthesis, 
namely molecular genetics.  
This interaction between paired disciplines can have important results . In the case of  late 
nineteenth -century cell research, progress was fueled by competition among the various 
attitudes and issues derived from cell biology and biochemistry. Joseph Fruton, a biochemist, 
has suggested that such competition and the resulting t ensions among researchers are a 
principal source of vitality and are likely to lead to unexpected and exciting novelties in the 
future, as they have in the past.  
9. Which one of the following best states the central idea of the passage?  
(A) Antithetical scientific disciplines can both stimulate and hinder one anothers 
research in complex ways.  
(B) Antithetical scientific disciplines often interact with one another in ways that 
can be highly useful.  
(C) As disciplines such as cytology and biochemistry adv ance, their interaction 
necessarily leads to a synthesis of their approaches.  
(D) Cell research in the late nineteenth century was plagued by disagreements 
between cytologists and biochemists.  
(E) In the late nineteenth century, cytologists and biochemi sts made many 
valuable discoveries that advanced scientific understanding of the cell . 
10. The passage states that in the late nineteenth century cytologists deduced the  
(A) maps of chromosomes  
(B) chemical nature of protoplasm  
(C) spatial relationship of molecules within the cell  
(D) role of enzymes in biological processes  
(E) sequence of the movement of chromosomes during cell division  
11. It can be inferred from the passage that in the late nineteenth century the debate 
over the structural nature of protoplasm (line  25-29) was most likely carried on  
(A) among cytologis ts 
(B) among biochemists  
(C) between cytologists and biochemists  
(D) between cytologists and geneticists  858 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (E) between biochemists and geneticists  
12. According to the passage, cytologists in the late nineteenth century were critical 
of the cell research of biochemists because cytologists believed that  
(A) the methods of biochemistry were inadequate to account for all of the 
chemical reactions that occurred in cytological preparations  
(B) the methods of biochemistry could not adequately discover and explai n the 
structures of living cells  
(C) biochemists were not interested in the nature of protoplasm  
(D) biochemists were not interested in cell division  
(E) biochemists were too ignorant of cytology to understand the basic processes 
of the cell  
13. The author quotes Fruton (lines  62-64) primarily in order to  
(A) restate the authors own conclusions  
(B) provide new evidence about the relationship of cyt ology to biochemistry  
(C) summarize the position of the biochemists described in the passage  
(D) illustrate the difficulties encountered in the synthesis of disciplines  
(E) emphasize the ascendancy of the theories of biochemists over those of 
cytologist s 
14. Which one of the following inferences about when the enzyme theory of life was 
formulated can be drawn from the passage?  
(A) The theory was formulated before the appearance of molecular biology.  
(B) The theory was formulated before the initial discov ery of cell architecture.  
(C) The theory was formulated after the completion of chromosome mapping.  
(D) The theory was formulated after a synthesis of the ideas of cytologists and 
biochemists had occurred . 
(E) The theory was formulated at the same time as the beginning of the debate 
over the nature of protoplasm.  
15. Which one of the following statements about cells is most compatible with the 
views of late nineteenth -century biochemists as those views a re described in the 
passage?  
(A) The secret of cell function resides in the structure of the cell . 
(B) Only by discovering the chemical composition of protoplasm can the 
processes of the cell be understood.  
(C) Scientific knowledge about the chemical compo sition of the cell can help to 
explain behavioral patterns in organisms.  
(D) The most important issue to be resolved with regard to the cell is determining 
the physical characteristics of protoplasm.  
(E) The methods of chemistry must be supplemented before a full account of the  LSAT  859 
 cells structures can be made.  
16. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the material 
presented in the passage?  
(A) An account of a process is given,  and then the reason for its occurrence is 
stated . 
(B) A set of examples is provided and then a conclusion is drawn from them.  
(C) A general proposition is stated, and then an example is given . 
(D) A statement of principles is made, and then a rationale fo r them is debated . 
(E) A problem is analyzed, and then a possible solution is discussed.  
There are two major systems of criminal procedure in the modern world the adversarial 
and the inquisitorial. Both systems were historically preceded by the system of private 
vengeanc e in which the victim of a crime fashioned a remedy and administered it privately, 
either personally or through an agent.  
The modern adversarial system is only one historical step removed from the private 
vengeance system and still remains some of its char acteristic feature. For example, even 
though the right to initiate legal action  against a criminal has now been extended to all 
members of society  (as represented by the office of the public prosecutor ), and even though 
the police department has effectively assumed the pretrial investigative functions o n behalf of 
the prosecution, the adversarial system still leaves the defendant to conduct his or her own 
pretrial investigation. The trial is views as a forensic duel between two adversaries, presided 
over by a judge who, at the start , has no knowledge of the investigative background of the case. 
In the final analysis the adversarial system of criminal procedure symbolizes and regularizes 
punitive combat.  
By contrast, the inquisitorial system begins historically where the adversarial system 
stopped its development. It is two historical steps removed from the system of private 
vengeance. From the standpoint of legal anthropology , then, it is historically superior to the 
adversarial system. Under the inquisitorial system, the public pros ecutor has the duty to 
investigate not just on behalf of society but also on behalf of the defendant. Additionally, the 
public prosecutor has the duty to present the court not only evidence that would convict the 
defendant, but also evidence that could pro ve the defendants innocence. The system 
mandates that both parties permit full pretrial discovery of the evidence in their possession. 
Finally, an aspect of the system that makes the trial less like a duel between two adversarial 
parties is that the inqui sitorial system mandates that the judge take an active part in the 
conduct of the trial, with a role that is both directive and protective.  
Fact-finding is at the heart of the inquisitorial system. This system operate on the 
philosophical premise that in a  criminal action the crucial factor is the body of facts, not the 
legal rule  (in contrast to the adversarial system ), and the goal of the entire procedure is to 
attempt to recreate , in the mind of the court, the commission of the alleged crime.  
Because of  the inquisitorial systems thoroughness in conducting its pretrial investigation, it 
can be concluded that, if given the choice, a defendant who is innocent would prefer to be tried 
under the inquisitorial system, whereas a defendant who is guilty would p refer to be tried under 
the adversarial system.  860 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 17. It can be inferred from the passage that the crucial factor in a trial under the 
adversarial system is  
(A) rules of legality  
(B) dramatic reenactments of the crime  
(C) the search for relevant facts  
(D) th e victims personal pursuit of revenge  
(E) police testimony about the crime  
18. The author sees the judges primary role in a trial under the inquisitorial system 
as that of  
(A) passive observer  
(B) biased referee  
(C) uninvolved administrator  
(D) aggres sive investigator  
(E) involved manager  
19. According to the passage, a central distinction between the system of private 
vengeance and the two modern criminal procedure systems was the shift in 
responsibility for initiating legal action against a crimin al from the  
(A) defendant to the courts  
(B) victim to society  
(C) defendant to the prosecutor  
(D) courts to a law enforcement agency  
(E) victim to the judge  
20. All of the following are characteristics of the inquisitorial system that the author 
cites E XCEPT  
(A) It is based on cooperation rather than conflict . 
(B) It encourages full disclosure of evidence.  
(C) It requires that the judge play an active role in the conduct of the trial.  
(D) It places the defendant in charge of his or her defense.  
(E) It  favors the innocent.  
21. The authors attitude toward the inquisitorial system can best be described as  
(A) doubtful that its judges can be both directive and protective  
(B) satisfied that it has potential for uncovering the relevant facts in a case  
(C) o ptimistic that it will replace the adversarial system  
(D) wary about its downplaying of legal rules  
(E) critical of its close relationship with the private vengeance system  
Outside the medical profession, there are various efforts to cut medicine down to size : not 
only widespread malpractice litigation and massive governmen tal regulation, but also attempts  LSAT  861 
 by consumer groups and others to redefine medicine as a trade rather than as a profession, and 
the physician as merely a technician for hire under contract. Why should physicians (or indeed 
all sensible people) resist such  efforts to give the practice of medicine a new meaning? We can 
gain some illumination from etymology. Trade, from Germanic and Anglo -Saxon roots 
meaning a course or pathway, has come to mean derivatively a habitual occupation and has 
been related to c ertain skills and crafts . On the other hand, while profession today also entails 
a habit of work, the word profession itself traces to an act of self -conscious and public even 
confessional speech. To profess preserves the meaning of its Latin source,  to declare 
publicly; to announce, affirm, avow . A profession is an activity or occupation to which its 
practitioner publicly professes, that is, confesses, devotion. But public announcement seems 
insufficient; publicly declaring devotion to plumbing or a uto repair would not turn these trades 
into professions.  
Some believe that learning and knowledge are the diagnostic signs of a profession. For 
reasons probably linked to the medieval university, the term profession has been applied to 
the so -called lear ned professions medicine, law, and theology the practices of which are 
founded upon inquiry and knowledge rather than mere  know how . Yet it is not only the 
pursuit and acquisition of knowledge that makes one a professional. The knowledge involved 
makes the profession one of the learned variety, but its professional quality is rooted in 
something else.  
Some mistakenly see k to locate that something else in the prestige and honor accorded 
professionals by society, evidenced in their special titles and the special deference and 
privileges they receive. But externalities do not constitute medicine a profession . Physicians are 
not professionals because they are honored; rather, they are honored because of their 
profession. Their titles and the respect they are shown superficially signify and acknowledge 
something deeper, that physicians are persons of the professional sort, knowingly and freely 
devoting themselves to a way of life worthy of such devotion. Just as lawyers devote 
themselves to rectifying injustices, looking up to what is lawful and right ; just as teachers 
devote themselves to the education of the young, looking up to truth and wisdom ; so 
physicians heal the sick, looking up to health and wholesomeness. Being a professional is thus 
rooted in our moral nature and in that which warrants and impels maki ng a public confession to 
a way of life.  
Professing oneself a professional is an ethical act because  it is not a silent and private act, 
but an articulated and public one ; because it promised continuing devotion to a way of life, not 
merely announces a pre sent preference or a way to a livelihood ; because it is an activity in 
service to some high good that insists on devotion ; because  it is difficult and demanding. A 
profession engages  ones character and heart, no t merely ones mind and hands.  
22. According to the author, which one of the following is required in order that one 
be a professional?  
(A) significant prestige and a title  
(B) know -how in a particular field  
(C) a long and difficult educational endeavor  
(D) a commitment to political justice  862 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (E) a public confession of devotion to a way of life  
23. Which one of the following best expresses the main point made by the author in 
the passage?  
(A) Medicine is defined as a profession because of the etymology o f the word 
profession.  
(B) It is a mistake to pay special honor to the knowledge and skills of physicians.  
(C) The work of physicians is under attack only because it is widely 
misunderstood.  
(D) The correct reason that physicians are professionals is tha t their work 
involves public commitment to a high good.  
(E) Physicians have been encouraged to think of themselves as technicians and 
need to reorient themselves toward ethical concerns.  
24. The question posed by the author in lines 7 -10 of the passage introduces which 
one of the following?  
(A) the authors  belief that it is futile to resist the trend toward defining the 
physicians work as a trade  
(B) the authors dislike of governmental regulation and consumer advocacy  
(C) the authors inquiry into the nature of the practice of medicine  
(D) the authors su ggestions for rallying sensible people to a concentrated defense 
of physicians  
(E) the authors fascination with the origins of words  
25. In the passage, the author mentions or suggests all of the following EXCEPT  
(A) how society generally treats physicians  
(B) that the practice of medicine is analogous to teaching  
(C) that being  a professional is in part a public act  
(D) the specific knowledge on which trades are based  
(E) how a livelihood is different from a profession  
26. The authors attitude toward professionals is best described as  
(A) eager that the work of one group of professionals, physicians, be viewed from 
a new perspective  
(B) sympathetic toward professionals who have become demoralized by public 
opinion  
(C) surprised that professionals have been balked by governmental regulations 
and threats of litigation  
(D) disma yed that most professionals have come to be considered technicians  
(E) certain that professionals confess a commitment to ethical ideals  
27. Based on the information in the passage, it can be inferred that which one of the 
following would most logically begin a paragraph immediately following the  LSAT  863 
 passage? 
(A) A skille d handicraft is a manual art acquired by habituation that enables 
trades people to tread regularly and reliably along the same path.  
(B) Critics might argue that being a doctor, for example, requires no ethical or 
public act; thus medicine, as such , is morally neutral, does not bind character, 
and can be used for good or ill.  
(C) Sometimes the pursuit of personal health competes with the pursuit of other 
goods, and it has alw ays been the task of the community to order and define 
competing ends.  
(D) Not least among the myriad confusions and uncertainties of our time are 
those attending  efforts to discern and articulate the essential characteristics 
of the medial profession.  
(E) When, in contrast, we come to physicians of the whole body , we come tacitly 
acknowledging the meaning of illness and its potential threat to all that we 
hold dear.  
28. Which one of the following best describes the authors purp ose in lines 18 -42 of 
the passage?  
(A) The author locates the something else that truly constitutes  a profession.  
(B) The author dismisses efforts to redefine the meaning of the term profession.  
(C) The author considers, and largely criticizes several definitions of what 
constitutes a profession.  
(D) The author clarifies the meaning of the term profession by advocating a 
return to its linguistic and historical roots.  
(E) The author distinguishes trades such as plumbing and auto repair from 
professions such as medicine, law, and theology.  
LSAT   18    SECTION III 
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of question s to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately  and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
The fairness of the judicial process depends on the objective presentation of facts to an 
impartial jury made up of ones peers. Present the facts, and you have  a fair trial. However, 
fact-finding, especially for interpersonal disagreements, is not so straightforward and is often 
contaminated by variables that reach beyond the legal domain.  
A trial is an attempt to transport jurors to the time and place of the di sputed event, to 
recreate the disputed event, or at least to explain that event with maximum accuracy. A trial 
falls short of  this goal, however, because it presents selected witnesses who recite selected 
portions of their respective memories concerning selected observations of the disputed event. 864 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 These multiple selections are referred to as the abstraction process.  Limitations in both 
perception and memory are responsible for the fact that the remembered event contains only a 
fraction of the detail present during the actual event, and the delay between observation and 
recitation causes witnesses memories to lose ev en more of the original perceptions. During the 
course of a trial, a witnesss recitation of the now -abstracted events may reflect selected 
disclosure based on his or her attitudes and motivations surrounding that testimony. 
Furthermore, the incidents repo rted are dependent on the lines of inquiry established by the 
attorneys involved. Accordingly, the recited data are a fraction of the remembered data, which 
are a fraction of the observed data, which are a fraction of the total data for the event.  
After th e event that led to the trial has been abstracted by participants in the trial, jurors 
are expected to resolve factual issues. Some of the jurors conclusions are based on facts that 
were directly recited; others are found inferentially. Here another abstr action process takes 
place. Discussions during deliberations  add to the collective pool of recalled evidentiary 
perceptions; nonetheless, the jurors abstraction processes further reduce the number of 
characteristics traceable to the original event . 
Complication can arise from  false abstractions at each stage. Studies have shown that 
witnesses recall having perceived incidents that are known to be absent from a given event. 
Conversely, jurors can remember hearing evidence tha t is unaccounted for in court transcripts. 
Explanations for these phenomena range from bias through prior conditioning or observer 
expectation to faulty reportage of the event based on the constraints of language. Aberrant 
abstractions in perception or recollection may not be conscious or deliberate,  but reliability is 
nevertheless diluted.  
Finally, deliberate untruthfulness has always been recognized as a risk of testimonial 
evidence. Such intentionally false abstractions, however, are only a small part of  the 
inaccuracies produced by the abstraction process.  
1. In this passage, the authors main purpose is to  
(A) discuss a process that jeopardizes the fairness of jury trials  
(B) analyze a methodology that safeguards the individuals right to fair trial  
(C) explain why jurors should view eyewitness testimony with skepticism  
(D) defend the trial -by-jury process, despite its limitations  
(E) point out the unavoidable abuses that have crept into the judicial process  
2. The author considers all of the following obstacles to a fair trial EXCEPT  
(A) selective perceptions  
(B) faulty communications  
(C) partial disclosures  
(D) intentional fal sifications  
(E) too few abstractions  
3. The author would most likely agree that the abstraction process occurs in the 
judicial process primarily because  
(A) some jurors conclusions are based on facts rather than on inferences   LSAT  865 
 (B) remembered events depe nd upon an individual s emotions  
(C) human beings are the sources and users of data presented in trials  
(D) it is difficult to distinguish between deliberate falsehood and unintentional 
selected disclosure  
(E) witnesses often dispute one anothers recol lections of events  
4. It can be inferred that the author believes the ability of juries to resolve factual 
issues is  
(A) limited by any individual jurors tendency to draw inferences from the facts 
presented during the trial  
(B) overwhelmed by the collecti ve pool of recalled evidentiary perceptions  
(C) unaffected by the process of trying to reenact the event leading to the trial  
(D) dependent upon the jurys ability to understand the influence of the 
abstraction process on testimony  
(E) subject to the same limitations of perception and memory that affect witnesses  
5. With which one of the following statements would the author most likely agree?  
(A) If deliberate untruthfulness were all the courts had to contend with, jury trials 
would be fairer than they are today.  
(B) Lack of moral standards is more of an impediment to a fair trial than human 
frailty.  
(C) The bulk of the inaccuracies produced by the abstraction process are 
innocently presented and rarely have any serious consequen ces. 
(D) If the inaccuracies resulting from the abstraction process persist, the present 
trial-by-jury system is likely to become a thing of the past.  
(E) Once intentional falsification of evidence is eliminated from trials, ensuring 
an accurate presentation of facts will easily follow.  
6. The authors attitude toward the abstraction process that occurs when witnesses 
testify in a trial can best be d escribed as  
(A) confident that witnesses can be conditioned to overcome many limitations of 
memory  
(B) concerned that it may undermine witnesses ability to accurately describe the 
original event in dispute  
(C) critical of witnesses motivations when delive ring testimony  
(D) indifferent toward the effect the abstraction process has on testimony  
(E) suspicious of witnesses efforts to describe remembered events truthfully  
7. Given the information in the passage, the actual event that is disputed in a jury 
trial is most like  
(A) a group of job applicants that is narrowed down to a few finalists  
(B) a subject that is photographed from varied and increasingly distant vantage 866 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 points  
(C) scraps of fabric that are sewn together to make an intricately designed quilt  
(D) a puzzle that is unsystematically assembled through trial and error  
(E) a lie t hat is compounded by additional lies in order to be maintained  
A medical article once pointed  with great alarm to an increase in cancer among milk 
drinkers. Cancer, it seems, was becoming increasingly frequent in New England, Minnesota, 
Wisconsin, and Swit zerland, where a lot of milk is produced and consumed, while remaining 
rare in Ceylon, where milk is scarce. For further evidence it was pointed out that cancer was 
less frequent in some states of the southern United States where less milk was consumed. Al so, 
it was pointed out, milk -drinking English women get some kinds of cancer eighteen times as 
frequently as Japanese women who seldom drink milk.  
A little digging might uncover quite a number of ways to account for these figures , but one 
factor is enough by itself to show them up. Cancer is predominantly a disease that strikes in 
middle life or after . Switzerland and the states of the United States mentioned first are alike in 
having populations with relatively long spans of life. English women at the time  the study was 
made were living an average of twelve years longer than Japanese women.  
Professor Helen M. Walker has worked out an amusing illustration of the folly in assuming 
there must be cause and effect whenever two things vary together. In investigat ing the 
relationship between age and some physical characteristics of women, begin  by measuring the 
angle of the feet in walking. You will find that the angle tends to be greater among older 
women. You might first consider whether this indicates that women  grow older because they 
toe out, and you can see immediately that this is ridiculous. So it appears that age increases the 
angle between the feet, and most women must come to toe out more as they grow older.  
Any such conclusion is probably false and certa inly unwarranted. You could only reach it 
legitimately by studying the same women or possibly equivalent groups over a period of 
time. That would eliminate the factor responsible here, which is that the older women grew up 
at a time when a young lady was t aught to toe out in walking, while the members of the 
younger group were learning posture in a day when that was discouraged.  
When you find somebody usually an interested party making a fuss about a correlation, 
look first of all  to see if it is not one of this type, produced by the stream of events, the trend of 
the times. In our time it is easy to show a positive correlation  between any pair of things like 
these: number of students in college, number of i nmates in mental institutions, consumption of 
cigarettes, incidence of heart disease, use of X -ray machines, production of false teeth, salaries 
of California school teachers, profits of Nevada gambling halls. To call some one of these the 
cause of some ot her is manifestly silly. But it is done every day.  
8. The authors conclusion about the relationship between age and the ways women 
walk indicates he believes that  
(A) toeing out is associated with aging  
(B) toeing out is fashionable with the younger gener ation  
(C) toeing out was fashionable for an older generation  
(D) studying equivalent groups proves that toeing out increases with age   LSAT  867 
 (E) studying the same women over a period of time proves that toeing out 
increases with age  
9. The author describes the  posited relationship between toeing out and age (lines 
29-40) in order to  
(A) illustrate a folly  
(B) show how social attitudes toward posture change  
(C) explain the effects of aging  
(D) illustrate a medical problem  
(E) offer a method to determine a wom ans age from her footprints  
10. Given the authors statements in the passage, his advice for evaluating statistics 
that show a high positive correlation between two conditions could include all the 
following statements EXCEPT  
(A) look for an explanation i n the stream of events  
(B) consider some trend of the times as the possible cause of both conditions  
(C) account for the correlations in some way other than causality  
(D) determine which of the two conditions is the cause and which is the effect  
(E) decide whether the conclusions have been reached legitimately and the 
appropriate groupings have been made  
11. Assume that there is a high statistical correlation between college attendance and 
individual earnings. Given this, the author would most  probably agree with which 
one of the following statements about the cause -effect relationship between 
college attendance and income?  
(A) Someones potential earnings may be affected by other variables, like wealth 
or intelligence, that are also associated  with college attendance.  
(B) Someone who attends graduate school will be rich.  
(C) Someone who attends graduate school will earn more money than someone 
who does not.  
(D) Someone who attends college will earn more money than someone who does 
not attend co llege.  
(E) Some one who attends college will earn more money only because she does 
attend college.  
12. According to the author , Professor Walker believes that  
(A) women who toe out age more rapidly than women who do not  
(B) most women toe out as they gro w older because age increases the angle 
between the feet  
(C) older women tend to walk with a greater angle between the feet  
(D) toeing out is the reason why women grow old  
(E) a causal relationship must exist whenever two things vary together  868 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 13. The au thor would reject all the following statements about cause -effect 
relationships as explanations for the statistics that show an increase in cancer 
rates EXCEPT that the  
(A) Ceylonese  drink more milk than the English  
(B) Swiss produce and consume large quan tities of dairy products  
(C) Women of New England drink more milk than the women who live in some 
states of the southern United States  
(D) People of Wisconsin have relatively high life expectancies  
(E) People who live in some states of the southern United States have relatively 
high life expectancies  
14. How would the author be most likely to explain the correlation between the 
salaries of California school teachers [and the] profits of Nevada g ambling 
halls (Lines 63 -64)? 
(A) There is a positive correlation that is probably due to California teachers 
working in Las Vegas on weekends to increase both their salaries and 
increase both their salaries and Nevadas gambling profits.  
(B) There is a p ositive correlation that is probably linked to general economic 
trends, but no direct causal relationship exists.  
(C) There is a negative correlation that is probably linked to general economic 
trends, but no direct causal relationship exists.  
(D) There is  a negative correlation because the element that controls Las Vegas 
gambling probably has agents in the California school system.  
(E) The author would deny the existence of any correlation whatsoever.  
In most developed countries, men have higher salarie s, on average, than women. Much of 
the salary differential  results from the tendency of women to be in lower -paying occupations. 
The question of whether this occupational employment pattern can be attri buted to sex 
discrimination is a complex one. In fact, wage differentials among occupations are the norm 
rather than the exception . Successful athletes commonly earn more than Nobel Prize -winning 
academics; gifted artists often cannot earn enough to surviv e, while mediocre investment 
bankers prosper. Given such differences, the question naturally arises: talent and ability being 
equal , why does anyone man or woman enter a low -paying occupation? One obvious answer 
is personal choice. An individual may prefer , for example, to teach math at a modest salary 
rather than to become a more highly paid electrical engineer.  
Some people argue that personal choice also explains sex -related wage differentials . 
According to this explanation, many women, because they place  a high priority on parenting  
and performing household services, choose certain careers in which they are free to enter and 
leave the work force with minimum penalty. They may choose to acquire skills, such as typing 
and salescler king, that do not depreciate rapidly with temporary absences from the work force. 
They may avoid occupational specialties that require extensive training periods, long and 
unpredictable hours, and willingness to relocate, all of which make specialization i n domestic 
activities problematic. By choosing to invest less in developing their career potential and to  LSAT  869 
 expend less effort outside the home, women must, according to this explanation, pay a price in 
the fo rm of lower salaries. But women cannot be conside red the victims of discrimination 
because they prefer  the lower -paying occupations to higher -paying ones.  
An alternative explanation for sex -related wage differentials is that women do not 
voluntarily choose lower -paying occupations but are forced into the m by employers and social 
prejudices. According to proponents of this view, employers who discriminate may refuse to 
hire qualified women for relatively high -paying occupations. More generally, subtle 
society -wide prejudices may induce women to avoid certa in occupations in favor of others that 
are considered more suitable. Indeed, the choice of women to specialize in parenting and 
performing household services may itself result from these subtle prejudices. Whether the 
discrimination is by employers in a particular occupation or by society as a whole is irrelevant; 
the effect will be the same. Further, if such discrimination does occur, women excluded from 
certain occupations will flood others, and this increase in supply will have a depressing effect on 
wages in occupations dominated by women.  
15. Which one of the following is the best little for the passage?  
(A) Wage Differentials Between Men and Women  
(B) Women in Low -Paying Occupations: Do They Have a Choice?  
(C) Sex Discrimination in the Workplace  
(D) The Role of Social Prejudice in Womens Careers  
(E) Home vs. Office: how Does the Modern Woman Choose?  
16. In stating that Successful athletes commonly earn more than Nobel 
Prize -winning academics (lines 10 -11), the authors primary purpose is to  
(A) demonstrate that education has little to do wit h making money  
(B) suggest that people with talent and ability should not enter low -paying 
occupations  
(C) show that highly paid occupations generally require long hours and extensive 
training  
(D) imply that a person can be successful and still not make mu ch money  
(E) give an example of how certain occupations are better paid than others 
regardless of inherent worth or talent required  
17. Which one of the following cases is least likely to involve sex discrimination, as 
it is described in the passage?  
(A) An emp loyer hires a man rather than an equally qualified woman.  
(B) A woman chooses to enter a high -paying occupation that uses her talent and 
ability.  
(C) A woman chooses an occupation that is already dominated by women.  
(D) A woman chooses a low -paying job tha t allows her to devote more time to her 
family.  
(E) A woman chooses to avoid the pressure of being in an occupation not 
considered suitable for women . 870 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 18. Proponents of the alternative explanation (line 46) argue that  
(A) employers have difficulty persuading qualified women to enter relatively 
high-paying occupations  
(B) women choose undemanding jobs because they wish to keep their career 
options open  
(C) women will flood domestic occupations  
(D) salaries in female -dominated occupations will decrease as more women are 
forced into those occupation s by their exclusion from others  
(E) womens choice of occupation is irrelevant since they have always made less 
money than men and are likely to continue to do so  
19. Which one of the following statements is the best completion of the last 
paragraph of the passage?  
(A) Wage different ials will become more exaggerated and economic parity 
between men and women less and less possible.  
(B) Finally, women will be automatically placed in the same salary range as 
unskilled laborers.  
(C) The question is : how long will women allow themselves to  be excluded from 
male -dominated occupations?  
(D) In the last analysis, women may need to ask themselves if they can really 
afford to allow sex discrimination to continue.  
(E) Unless society changes its views, women may never escape the confines of 
the few occupations designated For Women Only . 
20. The authors attitude toward sex discrimination as an explanation for wage 
differentials can best be characterized as  
(A) critical of societys acceptance of discrimination  
(B) skeptical that discrimination is a factor  
(C) convinced that the problem will get worse  
(D) neutral with respect to its validity  
(E) frustrated by the intractability  of the problem  
The starting poin t for any analysis of insurance classification is an obvious but fundamental 
fact: insurance is only one of a number of ways of satisfying the demand for protection against 
risk. With few exceptions, insurance need not be purcha sed; people can forgo it if insurance is 
too expensive . Indeed, as the price of coverage rises, the amount purchased and the number of 
people purchasing will decline. Instead of buying insurance, people will self -insure by 
accumulating saving to serve as a  cushion in the event of  loss, self -protect by spending more 
on loss protection, or simply use the money not spent on insurance to purchase other goods 
and services . An insurer must compete against these alternatives, even in the absence of  
competiti on from other insurers.  
One method of competing for protection dollars is to classify potential purchasers into 
groups according to their probability of loss and the potential magnitude of losses if they occur.  LSAT  871 
 Different risk classes may then be charged di fferent premiums, depending on this expected loss. 
Were it not for the need to compete for protection dollars, an insurer could simply charge each 
individual a premium based on the average expected  loss of all its insureds (plus a margin for 
profit and exp enses), without incurring  classification costs. In constructing risk classes, the 
insurers goal is to calculate the expected loss of each insured, and to place insureds with 
similar expected losses into the same class, in order to charge each the same rate.  
An insurer can capture protection dollars by classifying because, through classification, it 
can offer low -risk individuals lower prices. Classification, however, involves two c osts. First, the 
process of classification is costly. Insurers must gather data and perform statistical operations 
on it; marketing may also be more costly when prices are not uniform. Second, classification 
necessarily raises premiums for poor risks, who purchase less coverage as a result. In the 
aggregate , classification is thus worthwhile to an insurer only when the gains produced from 
extra sales and fewer p ay-outs outweigh classification costs plus the costs of lost sales. Even in 
the absence of competition from other insurers, an insurer who engages in at least some 
classification is likely to capture more protection dollars than it loses.  
When there is not only competition for available protection dollars, but competition among 
insurers for premium dollars, the value of risk classification to  insurers becomes even clearer. 
The more refined (and accurate) an insurers risk classifications, the more capable it is of 
skimming good risks away from insurers whose classifications are less refined. If other 
insurers do not respond, either by refini ng their own classifications or by raising prices and 
catering mainly to high risks, their book of risks will contain a higher mixture of poor risks who 
are still being charged premiums calculated for average risks . These insurers will attract 
additional  poor risks, and this resulting adverse selection will further disadvantage their 
competitive positions.  
21. Which one of the following best identifies the main topic of the passage?  
(A) reduction of competition in the insurance business  
(B) classification  of potential insurance purchasers  
(C) risk avoidance in insurance sales  
(D) insurance protection and premiums  
(E) methods of insurance classifying  
22. The passage mentions all of the following as possible or certain costs of 
classifying EXCEPT the cost  of 
(A) collecting facts  
(B) conducting statistical analyses  
(C) selling insurance at different prices  
(D) a decrease in purchases by poor risks  
(E) larger, albeit fewer, claims  
23. Which one of the following is closest to the authors expressed positio n on 
competition in the insurance business?  
(A) It has a significant influence on most aspects of the insurance industry.  872 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (B) It is a relevant factor, but it has little practical consequence.  
(C) It is a basic but not very apparent element of the insurance  business.  
(D) It provides a strong incentive for insurers to classify potential customers.  
(E) It is influential in insurance marketing practices.  
24. The passage suggests that if all insurers classified risk, who among the following 
would be adversely affected?  
(A) all insurance purchasers  
(B) insurance purchasers who would be classified as  poor risks  
(C) individuals who self -insured or self protected  
(D) insurers who had a high proportion of good risks in their book of risks  
(E) insurers with the most refined risk classifications  
25. Given the discussion in the first paragraph, what is  the distinction, if any, between 
insurance and self -protection?  
(A) There is very little or no distinction between the two terms.  
(B) Insurance is a kind of self -protection.  
(C) Self -protection is a kind of insurance.  
(D) Insurance and self -protection  are two of several alternative means to a 
specific end . 
(E) Insurance and self -protection are the only two alternative means to a specific 
end. 
26. Which one of the following is most closely analogous to the process of 
classification in insurance, as it is described in the passage?  
(A) devising a profile  of successful employees and hiring on the basis of the 
profile  
(B) investigating the fuel efficiency of a make of automobile and deciding 
whether or not to buy on that basis  
(C) assessing an investors willingness to take risks before suggesting a specific 
investment  
(D) making price comparisons on potential major purchases and then seeking 
discounts from competing dealers  
(E) comparing prices for numerous minor items and the selecting one store for 
future purchases  
LSAT   19    SECTION IV  
Time  35 minutes  27 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis  of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the q uestion, and  LSAT  873 
 blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
Three kinds of study have been performed on Byron. There is the biographical study the 
very valuable examination of Byrons psychology and the events in his life. Escarpits 1958 work 
is an example of this kind of study and biographers to this day  continue to speculate about 
Byrons life. Equally valuable is the study of Byron as a figure important in the history of ideas; 
Russell and Praz have written studies of this ki nd. Finally, there are studies that primarily 
consider Byrons poetry. Such literary studies are valuable , however , only when they avoid 
concentrating solely on analyzing the verbal shadings of Byrons poetry to the exclusion of  any 
discussion of biographical considerations. A study with such a concentration would be of 
questionable value because Byrons poetry, for the most part , is simply not a poetry of subtle 
verbal meanings. Rather, on the wh ole, Byrons poems record the emotional pressure of certain 
moments in his life. I believe we cannot often read a poem of Byron s we often can  one of 
Shakespeares  without wondering what events or circumstances in his life prompted him to 
write it.  
No doubt the fact that most of Byrons poems cannot be convincingly read as subtle verbal 
creations indicates that Byron is not a great poet. It must be admitted too that Byrons literary 
craftsmanship is irregular and often his temperament disrupts eve n his lax literary method 
(although the result , an absence of method , has a significant purpose: it functions as a rebuke 
to a cosmos that Byron feels he cannot understand). If Byron is not a great poet , his poetry is 
nonetheless of extraordinary interes t to us because of the pleasure it gives us . Our main 
pleasure in reading Byrons poetry is the contact with a singular personality. Reading his work 
gives us illumination self-understanding after we have seen our weaknesses and aspirations 
mirrored in the  personality we usually find in the poems. Anyone who thinks that this kind of 
illumination is not a genuine reason for reading a poet should think carefully about why we read 
Donnes sonnets.  
It is Byron and Byrons idea of himself that hold his work toge ther (and that enthralled 
early nineteenth -century Europe ). Different characters speak in his poems, but finally it is 
usually he himself who is speaking : a far cry  from the impersonal poet Keats. Byrons poetry 
alludes to Greek and Roman m yth in the context of contemporary affairs, but his work remains 
generally of a piece because of his close presence in the poetry. In sum, the poetry is a shrewd 
personal performance, and to shut out  Byron the man is to fab ricate a work of pseudocriticism.  
1. Which one of the following titles best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) An Absence of Method. Why Byron Is Not a Great Poet  
(B) Byron: The Recurring Presence in Byrons Poetry  
(C) Personality and Poetry : The Biographical Dimension of Nineteenth -Century 
Poetry  
(D) Byrons Poetry: Its Influence on the imagination of Early -Nineteenth -Century 
Europe  
(E) Verbal Shadings: The Fatal Flaw of Twentieth -Century Literary Criticism  
2. The authors mention of Russell and Praz serves primarily to  
(A) differentiate them from one another  874 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (B) contrast their conclusions about Byron with those of Escarpit  
(C) po int out the writers whose studies suggest a new direction for Byron 
scholarship  
(D) provide examples of writers who have written one kind of study of Byron  
(E) give credit to the writers who have composed the best studies of Byron  
3. Which one of the fo llowing would the author most likely consider to be a 
valuable study of Byron?  
(A) a study that compared Byrons poetic style with Keats poetic style  
(B) a study that argued that Byrons thought ought not to be analyzed in terms of 
its importance in the h istory of ideas  
(C) a study that sought to identify the emotions felt by Byron at a particular time 
in his life  
(D) a study in which a literary critic argues that the language of Byrons poetry 
was more subtle than that of Keats poetry  
(E) a study in which a literary critic drew on experiences from his or her own life  
4. Which one of the following statements best describes the organization of first 
paragraph of the passage?  
(A) A generalization is made and then gradually refuted . 
(B) A number of theories are discussed and then the author chooses the most 
convincing one . 
(C) Several categories are mentioned and then one category is discussed in some 
detail . 
(D) A historical trend is delineated and then a prediction about the future of the 
trend is offered . 
(E) A classification is made and then a rival classification is substituted in its 
place . 
5. The author mentions that Byrons literary craftsmanship is irregular (lines 
27-28) most probably in order to  
(A) contrast Byrons poetic skill with that of S hakespeare  
(B) dismiss craftsmanship as a standard by which to judge poets  
(C) offer another reason why Byron is not a great poet  
(D) point out a negative consequence of Byrons belief that the cosmos is 
incomprehensible  
(E) indicate the most -often -cited explanation of why Byrons poetry lacks subtle 
verbal nuances  
6. According to the author Shakespeares poems differ from Byrons in that 
Shakespeares poems  
(A) have elicited a wider variety of responses from both literary critics and 
biographers   LSAT  875 
 (B) a re on the whole less susceptible to being read as subtle verbal creations  
(C) do not grow out of or are not motivated by actual events or circumstances in 
the poets life  
(D) provide the attentive reader with a greater degree of illumination concerning 
his or her own weaknesses and aspirations  
(E) can often be read without the readers being curious about what biographical 
factors motivated the poet to write them  
7. The author indicates which one of the following about biographers speculation 
concerning  Byrons life?  
(A) Such speculation began in earnest with Escarpits study  
(B) Such speculation continues today  
(C) Such speculation is less important than consideration of Byrons poetry  
(D) Such speculation has not given us a satisfactory sense of Byron s life  
(E) Such speculation has been carried out despite the objections of literary critics  
8. The passage supplies specific information that provides a definitive answer to 
which one of the following questions?  
(A) What does the author consider to be the pri mary enjoyment derived from 
reading Byron?  
(B) Who among literary critics has primarily studied Byrons poems?  
(C) Which moments in Byrons life exerted the greatest pressure on his poetry?  
(D) Has Byron ever been considered to be a great poet?  
(E) Di d Byron exert an influence on Europeans in the latter part of the nineteenth 
century?  
The United States Supreme Court has not always resolved legal issues of concern to Native 
Americans in a manner that has pleased the Indian nations. Many of the Courts d ecisions have 
been products of political compromise that looked  more to the temper of the times than to 
enduring principles of law. But accommodation is part of the judicial system in the United States, 
and judicial decisions must be assessed with this fac t in mind.  
Despite the accommodating nature of the judicial system, it is worth noting that the 
power of the Supreme Court has been exercised in a manner that has usually been beneficial to 
Native Americans, at least on minor issues and has not been whol ly detrimental on the larger, 
more important issues. Certainly there have been decisions that cast doubt on the validity of 
this assertion. Some critics point to the patronizing tone of many Court opinions and the 
apparent rejection of Native American valu es as important points to consider when reviewing a 
case. However , the validity of the assertion can be illustrated by reference to two important 
contributions that have resulted from the exercise of judicial power.  
First the Court has created rules of jud icial construction  that in general favor the rights of 
Native American litigants. The Courts attitude has been conditioned by recognition of the 
distinct d isadvantages Native Americans faced when dealing with settlers  in the past. Treaties 
were inevitably written in English for the benefit of their authors, whereas tribal leaders were 876 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 accustomed to making treaties without any written ac count, on the strength of  mutual 
promises sealed  by religious commitment and individual integrity. The written treaties were 
often broken and Native Americans were conf ronted with fraud and political and military 
aggression. The Court recognizes that past unfairness to Native Americans cannot be 
sanctioned by the force of law. Therefore, ambiguities in treaties are to be interpreted in favor 
of the Native American claima nts, treaties are to be interpreted as the Native Americans would 
have understood them and , under the reserved rights doctrine , treaties reserve to Native 
Americans all rights that have not been specifically granted away in other treaties.  
A second achieve ment of the judicial system is the protection  that has been provided 
against  encroachment by the states into tribal affairs. Federal judges are not inclined to view 
favorably efforts to extend states powers and jurisdictions because of the direct threat th at 
such expansion poses to the exercise of federal powers. In the absence of a federal statute 
directly and clearly allocating a function to the states , federal judges are inclined to reserve for 
the federal government and the tribal governments under its charge all those powers and 
rights they can be said to have possessed historically . 
9. According to the passage, one reason why the United States Supreme Court has 
not always resolved legal issues of concern to Native Americans in a manner that 
has please d the Indian nations (lines 1 -4) is that  
(A) Native Americans have been prevented from presenting their concerns 
persuasively  
(B) the Court has failed to recognize that the Indian nations concerns are 
different from those of other groups or from those of  the federal government  
(C) the Court has been reluctant to curtail the powers of the federal government  
(D) Native Americans faced distinct disadvantages in dealing with settlers in the 
past 
(E) the Court has made political compromises in deciding some  cases  
10. It can be inferred that the objections raised by the critics mentioned in line 18 
would be most clearly answered  by a United States Supreme Court decision that  
(A) demonstrated respect for Native Americans and the principles and qualities 
they consider important  
(B) protected the rights of the states in conflicts with the federal government  
(C) demonstrated recognition of the unfair treatment Native Americans received 
in the past  
(D) reflected consideration of the hardships su ffered by Native Americans 
because of unfair treaties  
(E) prevented repetition of inequities experienced by Native Americans in the 
past 
11. It can be inferred that the author calls the judicial system of the United States 
accommodating (line 10) prim arily in order to  
(A) suggest that the decisions of the United States Supreme Court have been less  LSAT  877 
 favorable to Native Americans than most people believe  
(B) suggest that the United States Supreme Court should be more supportive of 
the goals of Native Amer icans  
(C) suggest a reason why the decisions of the United States Supreme Court have 
not always favored Native Americans  
(D) indicate that the United States Supreme Court has made creditable efforts to 
recognize the values of Native Americans  
(E) indicate that the United States Supreme Court attempts to be fair to all parties 
to a case  
12. The authors attitude toward the United States Supreme Courts resolution of 
legal issues of concern to Native Americans can best be described as one of  
(A) wholehearted endorsement  
(B) restrained appreciation  
(C) detached objectivity  
(D) cautious opposition  
(E) suppressed exasperation  
13. It can be inferred that the author believes that the extension of the states powers 
and jurisdictions with respect  to Native American affairs would be  
(A) possible only with the consent of the Indian nations  
(B) favorably viewed by the United States Supreme Court  
(C) in the best interests of both state and federal governments  
(D) detrimental to the interests of Native  Americans  
(E) discouraged by most federal judges in spite of legal precedents supporting the 
extension  
14. The authors primary purpose is to  
(A) contrast opposing views  
(B) reevaluate traditional beliefs  
(C) reconcile divergent opinions  
(D) assess the claims ma de by disputants  
(E) provide evidence to support a contention  
15. It can be inferred that the author believes the United States Supreme Courts 
treatment of Native Americans to have been  
(A) irreproachable on legal grounds  
(B) reasonably supportive in m ost situations  
(C) guided by enduring principles of law  
(D) misguided but generally harmless  
(E) harmful only in a few minor cases  878 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 When catastrophe strikes, analysts typically blame some combination of powerful 
mechanisms. An earthquake is traced to an immense instability along a fault line; a stock 
market crash is blamed on the destabilizing effect of computer trading. These explanations may 
well be correct. But systems as large and complicated as the Earths crust or the stock market 
can break down not  only under the force of a mighty blow  but also at the drop of a pin . In a 
large interactive system, a minor event can start a chain reaction that leads to a catastrophe.  
Traditionally, investigators have analyzed large interactive systems in the same way they 
analyze small orderly systems, mainly because the methods developed for small systems have 
proved so successful. They believed they could predict the behavior of a large interactive 
system by studying its elements separately and by analyzing its compo nent mechanisms 
individually. For lack of a better theory, they assumed that in large interactive systems the 
response to a disturbance is proportional to that disturbance.  
During the past few decades, however, it has become increasingly apparent that many  
large complicated systems do not yield to traditional analysis . Consequently, theorists have 
proposed a theory of self -organized criticality : many large interactive systems evolve 
naturally to a critical state in which a minor event starts a chain react ion that can affect any 
number of elements in the system. Although such systems produce more minor events than 
catastrophes, the mechanism that leads to minor events is the same one that leads to major 
events.  
A deceptively simple system serves as a paradi gm for self -organized criticality: a pile of 
sand. As sand is poured one grain at a time onto a f lat disk , the grains at first stay close to the 
position where they land. Soon they rest on top of one another , creating a pile that has a gentle 
slope. Now an d then , when the slope becomes too steep , the grains slide down , causing a small 
avalanche. The system reaches its critical state when the amount of sand added is balanced , on 
average, by the amount falling off the edge of the disk.  
Now when a grain of san d is added, it can start an avalanche of any size, including a 
catastrophic event. Most of the time the grain will fall so that no avalanche occurs. By 
studying a specific area of the pile, one can even predict whether avalanches will occur there in 
the near future. To such a local observer, however, large avalanches would remain 
unpredictable because they are a consequence of the total history of the entire pile. No matter 
what the local dynamics are , catastrophic avalanches would persist at a relative f requency that 
cannot be altered: Criticality is a global property of the sandpile.  
16. The passage provides support for all of the following generalizations about large 
interactive systems EXCEPT:  
(A) They can evolve to a critical state.  
(B) They do not al ways yield to traditional analysis . 
(C) They make it impossible for observers to make any predictions about them . 
(D) They are subject to the effects of chain reactions . 
(E) They are subject to more minor events than major events.  
17. According to the passage, the criticality of a sandpile is determined by the  
(A) size of the grains of sand added to the sandpile   LSAT  879 
 (B) number of grains of sand the sandpile contains  
(C) ra te at which sand is added to the sandpile  
(D) shape of the surface on which the sandpile rests  
(E) balance between the amount of sand added to and the amount lost from the 
sandpi le 
18. It can be inferred from the passage that the theory employed by the investigators 
mentioned in the second paragraph would lead one to predict that which one of 
the following would result from the addition of a grain of sand to a sandpile?  
(A) The grain of sand would never cause anything more than a minor disturbance . 
(B) T he grain of sand would usually cause a minor disturbance, but would 
occasionally cause a small avalanche . 
(C) The grain of sand would usually cause either minor disturbance or a small 
avalanche, but would occasionally cause a catastrophic event . 
(D) The gr ain of sand would usually cause a catastrophic event, but would 
occasionally cause only a small avalanche or an event more minor 
disturbance . 
(E) The grain of sand would invariably cause a catastrophic event . 
19. Which one of the following best describe s the organization of the passage?  
(A) A traditional procedure is described and its application to common situations 
is endorsed: its shortcomings in certain rare but critical circumstances are 
then revealed . 
(B) A common misconception is elaborated and it s consequences are described a 
detailed example of one of these consequences is then given.  
(C) A general principle is stated and supported by several examples; an exception 
to the rule is then considered and its importance evaluated . 
(D) A number of seemi ngly unrelated events are categorized: the underlying 
processes that connect them are then detailed . 
(E) A traditional method of analysis is discussed and the reasons for its adoption 
are explained ; an alternative is then described and clarified by mean s of an 
example.  
20. Which one of the following is most analogous to the method of analysis 
employed by the investigators mentioned in the second paragraph?  
(A) A pollster gathers a sample of voter preferences and on the basis of this 
information makes a p rediction about the outcome of an election . 
(B) A historian examines the surviving documents detailing the history of a 
movement and from these documents reconstructs a chronology of the 
events that initiated the movement . 
(C) A meteorologist measures the rainfall over a certain period of the year and 
from this data calculates the total annual rainfall for the region.  880 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (D) A biologist observes the behavior of one species of insect and from these 
observations generalizes about the behavior of insects as a cla ss. 
(E) An engineer analyzes the stability of each structural element of a bridge and 
from these analyses draws a conclusion about the structural soundness of the 
bridge.  
21. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) arguing against the ab andonment of a traditional approach  
(B) describing the evolution of a radical theory  
(C) reconciling conflicting points of view  
(D) illustrating the superiority of a new theoretical approach  
(E) advocating the reconsideration of an unfashionable explana tion 
Historians have long accepted the notion that women of English descent who lived in the 
English colonies of North America during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were better 
off than either the contemporary women in England or the colonists o wn nineteenth -century 
daughters and granddaughters. The  golden age  theory originated in the 1920 s with the work 
of Elizabeth Dexter , who argued that there were relatively few women among the colonists, 
and that all hands male and female were needed to sustain the growing settlements. Rigid 
sex-role distinctions  could no t exist under such circumstances; female colonists could 
accordingly engage in whatever occupations they wished , encountering few legal or social 
constraints if they sought employment outside the home. The surplus of ma le colonists also 
gave women  crucial bargaining power in the marriage market since womens contributions 
were vital to the survival of colonial households.  
Dexters portrait of female colonists living under conditions of rough equality with their 
male counterparts was eventually inco rporated into studies of nineteenth -century middle -class 
women . The contrast between the self -sufficient colonial woman and the oppressed 
nineteenth -century woman , confined to her home by stultifying ideologies of domesticity and 
by the fact that industria lization eliminated employment opportunities for middle -class women , 
gained  an extraordinarily tenacious  hold on historians. Even scholars who have questioned the 
golden age view of colonial womens status have continued to accept the paradigm of a 
nineteenth -century decline from a more desirable past. For example, Joan Hoff -Wilson asserted 
that there was no golden age and yet emphasized that the nineteenth century brought 
increased loss of function and authentic  status for m iddle-class women.  
Recent publications about colonial women have exposed  the concept of a decline in status 
as simplistic and unsophisticated , a theory that  based its assessment of colonial womens status 
solely on one factor (their economic function in so ciety) and assumed all too  readily that a 
relatively simple social system automatically brought higher standing to colonial women. The 
new scholarship presents a far more complicated picture, one in which definitions of gender 
roles, the colonial economy, demographic patterns, religion, the law, and household 
organization all contributed to defining the circumstances of colonial womens lives. Indeed, the 
primary concern of modern scholarship is not to generalize about womens status but t o identify 
the specific changes and continuities in womens lives during the colonial period. For example, 
whereas earlier historians suggested that there was little change for colonial women before  LSAT  881 
 1800, the new scholarship suggests that a three -part chro nological division more accurately 
reflects colonial womens experiences. First was the initial period of English colonization (from 
the 1620s to about 1660); then a period during which patterns of family and community were 
challenged and reshaped (roughly  from 1660 to 1750); and finally the era of revolution 
(approximately 1750 to 1815), which brought other changes to womens lives.  
22. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) An earlier theory about the status of middle -class women in the nineteenth 
century has been supported by recent scholarship . 
(B) Recent studies of middle -class nineteenth -century women have altered an 
earlier theory about the status of colonial women . 
(C) Recent scholarship has exposed an earlier the ory about the status of colonial 
women as too narrowly based and oversimplified . 
(D) An earlier theory about colonial women has greatly influenced recent studies 
on middle -class women in the nineteenth century . 
(E) An earlier study of middle -class women was based on insufficient research on 
the status of women in the nineteenth century . 
23. The author discusses Hoff -Wilson primarily in order to  
(A) describe how Dexters theory was refuted by historians of nin eteenth -century 
North America  
(B) describe how the theory of middle -class womens nineteenth -century decline 
in status was developed  
(C) describe an important influence on recent scholarship about the colonial 
period  
(D) demonstrate the persistent influenc e of the golden age theory  
(E) provide an example of current research one the colonial period  
24. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would be most likely to 
describe the views of the scholars mentioned in line 32 as  
(A) unassailable  
(B) innovative  
(C) paradoxica l 
(D) overly sophisticated  
(E) without merit  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that in proposing the three -part chronological 
division (lines 60 -61), scholars recognized which one of the following?  
(A) The circumstances of colonial womens lives  were defined by a broad variety 
of social and economic factors . 
(B) Womens lives in the English colonies of North America were similar to 
womens lives in seventeenth -and eighteenth -century England . 
(C) Colonial womens status was adversely affected when  patterns of family and 882 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 community were established in the late seventeenth century . 
(D) Colonial womens status should be assessed primarily on the basis of their 
economic function in society . 
(E) Colonial womens status was low when the colonies were settled but changed 
significantly during the era of revolution . 
26. According to the author , the publications about colonial women mentioned in the 
third paragraph had which one of the followin g effects?  
(A) They undermined Dexters argument on the status of women colonists during 
the colonial period.  
(B) They revealed the tenacity of the golden age theory in American history . 
(C) They provided support for historians, such as Hoff -Wilson. Who study the 
nineteenth century . 
(D) They established that womens status did not change significantly from the 
colonial period to the nineteenth century . 
(E) They provided support for earlier theories about women colonists in the 
English colonies of North America . 
27. Practitioners of the new scholarship discussed in the last paragraph would be 
most likely to agree with which one of the following statem ents about Dexters 
argument?  
(A) It makes the assumption that womens status is determined primarily by their 
political power in society . 
(B) It makes the assumption that a less complex social system necessarily confers 
higher status on women . 
(C) It is b ased on inadequate research on womens economic role in the colonies . 
(D) It places too much emphasis on the way definitions of gender roles affected 
women colonists in the colonial period . 
(E) It accurately describes the way womens status declined in the nineteenth 
century.  
LSAT   20    SECTION IV  
Time  35 minutes  27 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what  is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question,  and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
 
Musicologists concerned with the London Pianoforte  school, the group of composers, 
pedagogues, pianists, publishers, and builders who contributed to the development of the 
piano in London at the  turn of the nineteenth century , have long encountered a formidable   LSAT  883 
 obstacle in the general unavailability of music of this school in modern scholarly  editions . 
Indeed, much of this repertory  has more or less vanished from our historical consciousness . 
Granted, the sonatas  and Gradus ad Parnassum  of Muzio Clementi and the nocturnes  of John 
Field have remained familiar enough (though more often than not  in editions lacking scholarly 
rigor), but the work of other leading representatives, like Johann Baptist Cramer and Jan 
Ladislav Dussek, has eluded serious attempts at revival.  
Nicholas Temperleys ambitious new anthology  decisively overcomes this de ficiency. What 
underscores the intrinsic value of Temperleys editions is that the anthology reproduces nearly 
all of the original music in facsimile . Making available this cross section  of English musical 
lifesome 8 00 works by 49 composers should encourage new critical perspectives about how 
piano music evolved in England, an issue of considerable relevance to our understanding of 
how piano music developed on the European continent , and of how , finally, the instrumen t was 
transformed from the fortepiano to what we know today as the piano.  
To be sure , the London Pianoforte school itself calls for review . School may well be too 
strong a word for what was arguably a group unified not so much by stylistic principles or 
aesthetic creed as by the geographical circumstance that they worked at various times in 
London and produced pianos and piano music for English pianos and English markets. Indeed, 
Temperley concedes that their variety may be so great as to cast doubt on the notion of a 
school.  
The notion of a school was first propounded by Alexander Ringer, who argued that laws of 
artistic survival forced the young, progressive Beethoven to turn outside Austria for creative 
models, and that he found inspiration in a group of pian ists connected with Clementi in London. 
Ringers proposed London Pianoforte school did suggest a circumscribed and fairly unified 
group for want of  a better term, a school of musicians whose influence was felt primarily in 
the decades ju st before and after 1800. After all, Beethoven did respond to the advances of the 
Broadwood piano its reinforced frame , extended compass, triple stringing, and pedals, for 
example and it is reasonable to suppose that London pianists  who composed music for such 
an instrument during the critical phase of its development exercised no small degree of 
influence on Continental musicians. Nevertheless, perhaps the most sensible approach to this 
issue is to define the school by the period ( c. 1766-1873) during which it flourished, as 
Temperley has done in the anthology.  
1. Which one of the following most accurately states the authors main point?  
(A) Temperley has recently called into question the designation of  a group of 
composers , pedagogues, pianists, publishers, and builders as the London 
Pianoforte school . 
(B) Temperleys anthology of the music of the London Pianoforte school 
contributes significantly to an understanding of an influential period in the 
history of music.  
(C) The music of the London Pianoforte school has been revived by the 
publication of Temperleys new anthology.  
(D) Primary sources for musical manuscripts provide the most reliable basis for 
musicological research.  884 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (E) The development of the modern piano in England influenced composers and 
other musicians throughout Europe.  
2. It can be inferred that which one of the following is true of the piano music of the 
London Pianoforte school?  
(A) The nocturnes of John F ield typify the London Pianoforte school style.  
(B) The Gradus ad Parnassum  of Muzio Clementi is the best -known work of 
these composers.  
(C) No original scores for this music are extant.  
(D) Prior to Temperleys edition, no attempts to issue new editions o f this music 
had been made.  
(E) In modern times much of the music of this school has been little known even 
to musicians.  
3. The author mentions the sonatas of Muzio Clementi and the nocturnes of John 
Field as examples of which one of the following?  
(A) works by composers of the London Pianoforte school that have been 
preserved in rigorous scholarly editions  
(B) works that are no longer remembered by most people  
(C) works acclaimed by the leaders of the London Pianoforte school  
(D) works by composers of the London Pianoforte schoo l that are relatively well 
known  
(E) works by composers of the London Pianoforte school that have been revived 
by Temperley in his anthology  
4. Which one of the following, if true, would most clearly undermine a portion of 
Ringers argument as the argument is described in the passage?  
(A) Musicians in Austria composed innovative music for the Broadwood piano as 
soon as the instrument became available.  
(B) Clementi and his followers produced most of their compositions between 
1790 and 1810.  
(C) The influence of Continental musicians is apparent in some of the works of 
Beethoven.  
(D) The pianist -composers of the London Pianoforte school shared many of the 
same stylistic principles.  
(E) Most composers of the London Pianoforte school were born on the Continent 
and were drawn to London by the work of Clementi and his followers.  
5. It can be inferred that the author uses the word advances (line 49) to refer to  
(A) enticements offer ed musicians by instrument manufacturers  
(B) improvements in the structure of a particular instrument  
(C) innovations in the forms of music produced for a particular instrument  
(D) stylistic elaborations made possible by changes in a particular instrument   LSAT  885 
 (E) changes in musicians opinions about a particular instrument  
6. It can be inferred from the passage as a whole that the authors purpose in the 
third paragraph is primarily to  
(A) cast doubt on the usefulness of Temperleys study of the London Piano forte 
school  
(B) introduce a discussion of the coherency  of the London Pianoforte school  
(C) summarize Ringers argument about the London Pianoforte school  
(D) emphasize the complex nature of the musicological elements shared by 
members of the London Piano forte school  
(E) identify the unique contributions made to music by the London Pianoforte 
school  
7. The author of the passage is primarily concerned with  
(A) explaining the influence of the development of the pianoforte on the music of 
Beethoven  
(B) describing Temp erleys view of the contrast between the development of 
piano music in England and the development of piano music elsewhere in 
Europe  
(C) presenting Temperleys evaluation of the impact of changes in piano 
construction on styles and forms of music composed  in the era of the 
London Pianoforte school  
(D) considering an alternative theory to that proposed by Ringer concerning the 
London Pianoforte school  
(E) discussing the contribution of Temperleys anthology to what is known of the 
history of the London Pianoforte school  
8. It can be inferred that Temperleys anthology treats the London Pianoforte school 
as 
(A) a group of pianist -composers who shared  certain stylistic principles and 
artistic creeds  
(B) a group of people who contributed to the development of piano music 
between 1766 and 1873  
(C) a group of composers who influenced the music of Beethoven in the decades 
just before and just after 1800  
(D) a series of compositions for the pianoforte published in the decades just 
before and just after 1800  
(E) a series of compositions that had a significant influence on the music of the 
Continent in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries  
What is law? By what processes do judges arrive at opinions, those documents that 
justify their belief that the la w dictates a conclusion one way or the other ? These are among 
the oldest questions in jurisprudence, debate about which has traditionally been dominated by 
representatives of two schools of thought: proponents of natural law, who see law as 886 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 intertwined wi th a moral order independent of societys rules and mores, and legal positivists , 
who see law solely as embodying the commands of a societys ruling authority.  
Since the early 1970s, these familiar questions have received some new and surprising 
answers in the legal academy. This novelty is in part a consequence of th e increasing influence 
there of academic disciplines and intellectual traditions previously unconnected with the study 
of law. Perhaps the most influential have been the answers given by the Law and Economics 
school. According to these legal economists, la w consists and ought to consist of those rules 
that maximize a societys material wealth and that abet the efficient operation of markets 
designed to generate wealth. More controversial have been the various answers provided by 
members of the Critical Lega l Studies movement , according to whom law is one among several 
cultural mechanisms by which holders of power seek to legitimate their domination. Drawing on 
related arguments developed in anthropology, sociology, and history, the critical legal scholars 
contend that law is an expression of power, but not, as held by the positivists, the power of the 
legitimate sovereign government. Rather, it is an expression of the power of elites who may 
have no legitimate authority, but who are intent on  preserving the privileges of their race, class, 
or gender.  
In the mid -1970s, James Boyd White began to articulate yet another interdisciplinary 
response to the traditional questions, and in so doing spawned what is now known as the Law 
and Liter ature movement . White has insisted that law, particularly as it is interpreted in judicial 
opinions, should be understood as an essentially literary activity. Judicial opinions should be 
read and evaluated not primarily as political acts or as attempts to maximize societys wealth 
through efficient rules, but rather as artistic performances. And like all such performances, 
White argues, each judicial opinion attempts in its own way to promote a particular political or 
ethical value.  
In the recent Justice as  Translation , White argues that opinion -writing should be regarded 
as an act of translation, and judges  as translators. As such , judges find themselves 
mediating between the authoritative legal text and the pressing legal problem that demands 
resolution. A judge must essentially re -constitute that text by fashioning a new one, which is 
faithful to the old text but also responsive to and informed by the conditions, constraints, and 
aspirations of the wor ld in which the new legal problem has arisen.  
9. Which one of the following best states the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Within the last few decades, a number of novel approaches to jurisprudence  
have defined the nature of the law in diverse ways.  
(B) Wit hin the last few decades, changes in society and in the number and type of 
cases brought to court have necessitated new methods of interpreting the 
law. 
(C) Of the many interdisciplinary approaches to jurisprudence that have surfaced 
in the last tow decade s, the Law and Literature movement is the most 
intellectually coherent.  
(D) The Law and Literature movement, first articulated by James Boyd White in 
the mid -1970s, represents a synthesis of the many theories of jurisprudence 
inspired by the social science s.  LSAT  887 
 (E) Such traditional legal scholars as legal positivists and natural lawyers are 
increasingly on the defensive against attacks from younger, more 
progressive theorists.  
10. According to the passage, judicial opinions have been described as each of th e 
following EXCEPT:  
(A) political statements  
(B) arcane statements  
(C) economic statements  
(D) artistic performances  
(E) acts of translation  
11. Which one of the following statements is most compatible with the principles of 
the Critical Legal Studies m ovement as that movement is described in the 
passage? 
(A) Laws governing the succession of power at the death of a head of state 
represent a synthesis of legal precedents, specific situations, and the values 
of lawmakers . 
(B) Laws allowing income tax deduc tions for charitable contributions, though 
ostensibly passed by lawmakers, were devised by and are perpetuated by the 
rich. 
(C) Laws governing the tariffs placed on imported goods must favor the 
continuation of mutually beneficial trade arrangements, even at the expense 
of long -standing legal precedent.  
(D) Laws governing the treatment of the disadvantaged and powerless members 
of a given society are an accurate indication of that societys moral state.  
(E) Laws controlling the electoral processes of a r epresentative democracy have 
been devised by lawmakers to ensure the continuation of that governmental 
system.  
12. Which one of the following does the passage mention as a similarity between the 
Critical Legal Studies movement and the Law and Literature mo vement?  
(A) Both offer explanations of how elites maintain their hold on power.  
(B) Both are logical extensions of either natural law or legal positivism.  
(C) Both see economic and political primacy as the basis of all legitimate power . 
(D) Both rely on di sciplines not traditionally connected with the study of law.  
(E) Both see the practice of opinion -writing as a mediating activity.  
13. Which one of the following can be inferred from the passage about the academic 
study of jurisprudence before the 1970s ? 
(A) It was concerned primarily with codifying and maintaining the privileges of 
elites.  
(B) It rejected theories that interpreted law as an expression of a groups power.  888 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (C) It seldom focused on how and by what authority judges arrived at opinions.  
(D) It was concerned primarily with the study of law as an economic and moral 
agent.  
(E) It was not concerned with such disciplines as anthropology and sociology.  
14. Proponents of the Law and Literature movement would most likely agree with 
which one of the following statements concerning the relationship between the 
law and judges w ritten opinions?  
(A) The once -stable relationship between law and opinion -writing has been 
undermined by new and radical theoretical developments . 
(B) Only the most politically conservative of judges continue to base their 
opinions on natural law or on leg al positivism.  
(C) The occurrence of different legal situations requires a judge to adopt diverse 
theoretical approaches to opinion -writing.  
(D) Different judges will not necessarily write the same sorts of opinions when 
confronted with the same legal situ ation.  
(E) Judges who subscribe to divergent theories of jurisprudence will necessarily 
render divergent opinions.  
15. Which one of the following phrases best describes the meaning of re -constitute 
as that word is used in line 54 of the passage?  
(A) c ategorize and rephrase  
(B) investigate and summarize  
(C) interpret and refashion  
(D) paraphrase and announce  
(E) negotiate and synthesize  
16. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) identify differing approaches  
(B) discount a novel trend  
(C) advoc ate traditional methods  
(D) correct misinterpretations  
(E) reconcile seeming inconsistencies  
Since the early 1920s, most petroleum geologists have favored a biogenic theory for the 
formation of oil. According to this theory, organic matter became buried  in sediments, and 
subsequent conditions of temperature and pressure over time transformed it into oil.  
Since 1979 an opposing abiogenic theory about the origin of oil has been promulgated . 
According to this th eory, what is now oil began as hydrocarbon compounds within the earths 
mantle (the region between the core and the crust) during the formation of the earth. Oil was 
created when gasses rich in methane, the lightest of the hydrocarbons, rose from the mantl e 
through fractures and faults in the crust, carrying a significant amount of heavier hydrocarbons 
with them. As the gases encountered intermittent drops in pressure, the heavier hydrocarbons  LSAT  889 
 condensed, forming oil, and were deposited in reservoirs through out the crust . Rock regions 
deformed by motions of the crustal plates provided the conduits and fractures necessary for the 
gases to rise through the crust.  
Opponents of the abiogenic theory charge that  hydrocarbons could not exist in the mantle, 
because h igh temperatures would destroy or break them down. Advocates of the theory, 
however, point out that other types of carbon exist in the mantle: unoxidized carbon must exist 
there, because diamonds are formed within the mantle before being brought to the sur face by 
eruptive processes. Proponents of the abiogenic theory also point to recent experimental work 
that suggests that the higher pressures within the mantle tend to offset the higher 
temperatures, allowing hydrocarbons, like unoxidized carbon, to contin ue to exist in the 
mantle.  
If the abiogenic theory is correct, vast undiscovered reservoirs of oil and 
gasundiscovered because the biogenic model precludes their existence may in actuality 
exist. One company owned by the Swedish government has found the a biogenic theory so 
persuasive that it has started exploratory drilling for gas or oil in a granite formation called the 
Siljan Ring not the best place to look for gas or oil if one believes they are derived from 
organic compounds, because granite forms fro m magma (molten rock) and contains no organic 
sediments. The ring was formed about 360 million years ago when a large meteorite hit the 
600-million -year-old granite that forms the base of the continental crust. The impact fractured 
the granite, and the Swe des believe that if oil comes from the mantle, it could have risen with 
methane gas through this now permeable rock. Fueling their optimism further is the fact that 
prior to  the start of drilling, methane gas had been detected rising through the granite.  
17. Which one of the following statements best expresses the main idea of the 
passage?  
(A) Although the new abiogenic theory about the origin of oil is derived f rom the 
conventional biogenic theory, it suggests new types of locations for oil 
drilling.  
(B) The small number of drilling companies that have responded to the new 
abiogenic theory about the origin of oil reflects the minimal level of 
acceptance the theor y has met with in the scientific community.  
(C) Although the new abiogenic theory about the origin of oil fails to explain 
several enigmas about oil reservoirs, it is superior to the conventional 
biogenic theory.  
(D) Although it has yet to receive either s upport or refutation by data gathered 
from a drilling project, the new abiogenic theory about the origin of oil 
offers a plausible alternative to the conventional biogenic theory.  
(E) Having answered objections about higher pressures in the earths core , 
proponents of the new abiogenic theory have gained broad acceptance for 
their theory in the scientific community.  
18. Which one of the following best describes the function of the third paragraph?  
(A) It presents a view opposed to a theory and points out  an internal contradiction 
in that opposing view.  890 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (B) It describes a criticism of a theory and provides countervailing evidence to 
the criticism.  
(C) It identifies a conflict between two views of a theory and revises both views.  
(D) It explains an argument  against a theory and shows it to be a valid criticism.  
(E) It points out the correspondence between an argument against one theory and 
arguments against similar theories.  
19. The passage suggests that the opponents of the abiogenic theory mentioned in the 
third paragraph would most probably agree with which one of the following 
statements?  
(A) The formation of oil does not involve the condensation of hydrocarbons 
released from the earths mantle.  
(B) Large oil reserves are often found in locations that contain small amounts of 
organic matter.  
(C) The eruptive processes by which diamonds are brought to the earths surface 
are similar to those that aid in the formation of oil.  
(D) Motions of the crustal plates often create the pressure necessary to transfo rm 
organic matter into oil.  
(E) The largest known oil reserves may have resulted from organic matter 
combining with heavier hydrocarbons carried by methane gas.  
20. Which one of the following is most analogous to the situation described in the 
final par agraph?  
(A) A new theory about the annual cycles of breeding and migration of the 
monarch butterfly has led scientists to look for similar patterns in other 
butterfly species.  
(B) A new theory about the stage at which a star collapses into a black hole has  
led astronomers to search for evidence of black holes in parts of the universe 
where they had not previously searched.  
(C) A new theory about how the emission of sulfur dioxide during coal -burning 
can be reduced has led several companies to develop desulf urization 
systems.  
(D) A new theory about photosynthesis has convinced a research team to explore 
in new ways the various functions of the cell membrane in plant cells.  
(E) A new theory about the distribution of metals in rock formations has 
convinced a  silver -mining company to keep different types of records of its 
operations.  
21. According to the passage all of the following are true of the Siljan Ring 
EXCEPT:  
(A) It was formed from magma.  
(B) It does not contain organic sediments.  
(C) Its ring shape e xisted 500 million years ago.   LSAT  891 
 (D) Methane gas has been detected rising through it . 
(E) It was shaped from the granite that makes up the base of the continental crust.  
Most studies of recent Southeast Asian immigrants to the United States have focused on 
their adjustment to life in their adopted country and on the effects of leaving t heir homelands. 
James Tollefsons Alien Winds examines the resettlement process from a different perspective 
by investigating the educational programs offered in immigrant processing centers. Based on 
interviews , transcripts  from classes, essays by immigrants, personal visits to a teacher -training 
unit, and official government documents , Tollefson relies on an impressive amount and variety 
of documentation  in making his arguments about processing centers educational programs.  
Tollefsons main contention is that the emphasis placed on immediate employment and on 
teaching the values, attitudes, and behaviors that the trai ning personnel think will help the 
immigrants adjust more easily to life in the United States i s often counterproductive and 
demoralizing. Because of concerns that the immigrants be self -supporting as soon as possible, 
they are trained almost exclusively f or low -level jobs that do not require English proficiency. In 
this respect , Tollefson claims , the processing centers suit the needs of employers more than 
they suit the long -term needs of the immigrant community. Tollefson also detects a 
fundamental flaw i n the attempts by program educators to instill in the immigrants the 
traditionally Western principles of self -sufficiency and individual success. The se efforts often 
have the effect of undermining the immigrants sense of community and, in doing so, 
someti mes isolate them from the moral support and even from business opportunities afforded 
by the immigrant community. The programs also encourage the immigrants to shed their 
cultural traditions and ethnic identity and adopt the lifestyles, beliefs, and charac teristics of 
their adopted country if they wish to enter fully into the national life.  
Tollefson notes that the ideological nature of these educational programs has roots in the 
turn-of-the-century educational programs designed to assimilate European immig rants into 
United States society. Tollefson provides a concise history of the assimilationist movement in 
immigrant education, in which European immigrants were encouraged to leave behind  the 
ways of the Old World and to adopt instead the principles and practices of the New World.  
Tollefson ably shows that the issues demanding real attention in the educational programs 
for Southeast Asian immigrants are not merely employment rates and government funding , but 
also the assumptions  underpinning the educational values in the programs. He recommends 
many improvements for the programs, including giving the immigrants a stronger voice in 
determining their needs and how to meet them, redesigning the curricula, and emphasizing  
long-term l anguage education and job training over immediate employment and the avoiding of 
public assistance . Unfortunately, though, Tollefson does not offer enough concrete solutions as 
to how these reforms could be carried out, despite his own descriptions of the complicated 
bureaucratic nature of the programs.  
22. Which one of the following statements best expresses the main idea of the 
passage?  
(A) Tollefsons focus on the economic and cultural factors involved in adjusting 
to a new country offers a significant d eparture from most studies of 
Southeast Asian immigration.  892 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (B) In his analysis of educational programs for Southeast Asian immigrants , 
Tollefson fails to acknowledge many of the positive effects the programs 
have had on immigrants lives.  
(C) Tollefson con vincingly blames the philosophy underlying immigrant 
educational programs for some of the adjustment problems afflicting 
Southeast Asian immigrants.  
(D) Tollefsons most significant contribution is his analysis of how Southeast 
Asian immigrants overcome th e obstacles they encounter in immigrant 
educational programs.  
(E) Tollefson traces a gradual yet significant change in the attitudes held by 
processing center educators toward Southeast Asian immigrants.  
23. With which one of the following statements co ncerning the educational programs 
of the immigration centers would Tollefson most probably agree?  
(A) Although the programs offer adequate job training, they offer inadequate 
English training.  
(B) Some of the programs attempts to improve the earning power  of the 
immigrants cut them off from potential sources of income.  
(C) Inclusion of the history of immigration in the United States in the programs 
curricula facilitates adjustment for the immigrants.  
(D) Immigrants would benefit if instructors in the prog rams were better prepared 
to teach the curricula developed in the teacher -training courses.  
(E) The programs curricula should be redesigned to include greater emphasis on 
the shared values , beliefs, and practices in the United States.  
24. Which one of the following best describes the opinion of the author of the 
passage with respect to Tollefsons work?  
(A) thorough but misguided  
(B) innovative but incomplete  
(C) novel but contradictory  
(D) illuminating but unappreciated  
(E) well documented but unori ginal  
25. The passage suggests that which one of the following is an assumption 
underlying the educational approach in immigrant processing centers?  
(A) There is a set of values and behaviors that if adopted by immigrants, facilitate 
adjustment to United S tates society . 
(B) When recent immigrants are self -supporting rather than supported by public 
assistance, they tend to gain English proficiency more quickly . 
(C) Immediate employment tends to undermine the immigrants sense of 
community with each other . 
(D) Long -term success for immigrants is best achieved by encouraging the  LSAT  893 
 immigrants to maintain a strong sense of community.  
(E) The principles of self -sufficiency and individual success are central to 
Southeast Asian culture and ethnicity.  
26. Which one o f the following best describes the function of the first paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) It provides the scholarly context for Tollefsons study and a description of his 
methodology . 
(B) It compares Tollefsons study to other works and presents the main argu ment 
of his study.  
(C) It compares the types of documents Tollefson uses to those used in other 
studies . 
(D) It presents the accepted theory on Tollefsons topic and the method by which 
Tollefson challenges it . 
(E) It argues for the analytical and technical superiority of Tollefsons study over 
other works on the topic . 
27. The author of the passage refers to Tollefsons descriptions of the bureaucratic 
nature of the immigrant educational programs in the four th paragraph most 
probably in order to  
(A) criticize Tollefsons decision to combine a description of the bureaucracies 
with suggestions for improvement  
(B) emphasize the authors disappointment in Tollefsons overly general 
recommendations for improvement s to the programs  
(C) point out the irony of Tollefson concluding his study with suggestions for 
drastic changes in the programs  
(D) support a contention that Tollefsons recommendations for improvements do 
not focus on the real sources of the programs pr oblems  
(E) suggest a parallel between the complexity of the bureaucracies and the 
complexity of Tollefsons arguments  
LSAT   21    SECTION I 
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and com pletely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
To many developers of technologies that affect public health or the environment , risk 
communication means persuading the public that the potential risks of such techn ologies are 
small and should be ignored. Those who communicate risks in this way seem to believe that lay 
people do not understand the actual nature of technological risk, and they can cite studies 
asserting that although people apparently ignore mundane h azards that pose significant danger, 894 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 they get upset about exotic hazards that pose little chance of death or injury. Because some 
risk communicators take this persuasive stance , many lay people see risk communication as a 
euphemism for brainwashing  done by experts.  
Since, however , the goal of risk communication should be to enable people to make 
informed decisions about technological risks, a clear understanding about how the public 
perceives risk is needed. Lay peoples definitions of risk are more likely to reflect subjective 
ethical concerns than are experts definitions . Lay people , for exampl e, tend to perceive a small 
risk to children as more significant than a large risk to consenting adults who benefit from the 
risk-creating technology. However, if asked to rank hazards by the number of annual fatalities, 
without reference to  ethical judgments, lay people provide quite reasonable estimates, 
demonstrating that they have substantial knowledge about many risks. Although some studies 
claim to demonstrate that lay people have inappropriate concerns about exotic haz ards, these 
studies often use questionable methods, such as asking lay people to rank risks that are hard to 
compare . In contrast, a recent study showed that when lay people were given the necessary 
facts and time , they understood the specific risks of ele ctromagnetic fields produced by 
high-voltage power transmission well enough to make informed decisions . 
Risk communication should therefore be based on the principle that people process new 
information in the context of their existing beliefs. If people kn ow nothing about a topic , they 
will find messages about that topic incomprehensible . If they have erroneous beliefs, they are 
likely to misconstrue the messages. Thus, communicators need to know the nature and extent 
of recipients knowledge and beliefs in  order to design messages that will not be dismissed or 
misinterpreted. This need was demonstrated in a research project concerning the publics level 
of knowledge about risks posed by the presence of radon in the home. Researchers used 
open-ended  interviews and questionnaires to determine what information should be included in 
their brochure on radon. Subjects who read the researchers brochure performed significantly 
better in understanding radon risks than did a control group who rea d a brochure that was 
written using a different approach by a government agency. Thus, careful preparation can help 
risk communicators to produce balanced material that tells people what they need to know to 
make decisions about technological risks.  
1. Which one of the following best expresses the main point of the passage?  
(A) Risk communicators are effectively addressing the proliferation of complex 
technologies that have increasing impact on public health and safety.  
(B) Risk communicators should assess lay peoples understanding of technologies 
in order to be able to give them the information they need to make 
reasonable decisions.  
(C) Experts who want to communicate to the public about the possible risks of 
complex technologies must simplify their messa ge to ensure that it is 
understandable . 
(D) Risk communication can be perceived as the task of persuading lay people to 
accept the impact of a particular technology on their lives.  
(E) Lay people can be unduly influenced by subjective concerns when making 
decisions about technological risks.   LSAT  895 
 2. The authors of the passage would be most likely to agree that the primary purpose 
of risk communication should be to  
(A) explain rather t han to persuade  
(B) promote rather than to justify  
(C) influence experts rather than to influence lay people  
(D) allay peoples fears about mundane hazards rather than about exotic hazards  
(E) foster public acceptance of new technologies rather than to acknowledge 
peoples ethical concerns  
3. According to the passage, it is probable that which one of the following will 
occur when risk communicators attempt to communicate with lay people who 
have mistaken ideas about a particular technology?  
(A) The lay p eople perceiving that the risk communicators have provided 
more -reliable information, will discard their mistaken notion . 
(B) The lay people will only partially revise their ideas on the basis of the new 
information . 
(C) The lay people fitting the new info rmation into their existing framework will 
interpret the communication differently that the risk communicators had 
intended . 
(D) The lay people misunderstanding the new information will further distort the 
information when they communicate it to other lay people . 
(E) The lay people will ignore any communication about a technology they 
consider potentially dangerous . 
4. Which one of the following is most clearly an example of the kind of risk 
perception discussed in the studies mentioned in line 8?  
(A) A skydi ver checks the lines on her parachute several times before a jump 
because tangled lines often keep the parachutes from opening properly  
(B) A person decides to quit smoking in order to lesson the probability of lung 
damage to himself and his family  
(C) A h omeowner who decides to have her house tested for radon also decides not 
to allow anyone to smoke in her house  
(D) A person who often weaves in and out of traffic while driving his car at 
excessive speeds worries about meteorites hitting his house  
(E) A group of townspeople opposes the building of a nuclear waste dump 
outsider their town and proposes that the dump be placed in another town  
5. It can be inferred that the authors of the passage would be more likely than would 
the risk communicator s discussed in the first paragraph to emphasize which one 
of the following?  
(A) lay peoples tendency to become alarmed about technologies that they find 
new or strange  896 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (B) lay peoples tendency to compare risks that experts would not consider 
comparable  
(C) the need for lay people to adopt scientists advice about technological risk  
(D) the inability of lay people to rank hazards by the number of fatalities caused 
annually  
(E) the impact of lay peoples value systems on their perceptions of risk  
6. According to the passage many lay people believe which one of the following 
about risk communication?  
(A) It focuses excessively on mundane hazards . 
(B) It is a tool used to m anipulate the public . 
(C) It is a major cause of inaccuracies in public knowledge about science . 
(D) It most often functions to help people make informed decisions . 
(E) Its level of effectiveness depends on the level of knowledge its audience 
already ha s. 
In April 1990 representatives of the Pico Korea Union of electronics workers in Buchon city, 
south Korea, traveled to the United States in order to demand just settlement of their claims 
from the parent company of their employers , who upon the formation  of the union  had shut 
down operations without paying the workers . From the beginning , the union cause was 
championed by an unprecedented coalition of Korean American groups and deeply affected the 
Korean American community on several levels.  
First, it served as  a rallying focus for a diverse community often divided by generation, 
class and political ideologies. Most notably, the Pico cause mobilized many young 
second -generation Korean Americans, many of whom had never been part of a political 
campaign before, le t alone one involving Korean issues. Members of this generation , unlike 
first-generation Korean Americans, generally fall within  the more privileged sectors of the 
Korean American community and often feel alienated from their Korean roots . In addition to 
raising the political consciousness of young Korean Americans, the Pico struggle sparked 
among them new interest in th eir cultural identity . The Pico workers also suggested new roles 
that can be played by recent immigrants, particularly working -class immigrants . These 
immigrants knowledge of working conditions overseas can help to globalize the perspective of 
their commu nities and can help to establish international ties on a more personal level, as 
witnessed in the especially warm exchange between the Pico workers and recent working -class 
immigrants from China . In addition to broadening the political base within the Kore an American 
community, the Pico struggle also led to new alliances between  the Korean American 
community and progressive labor and social justice groups within the larger society as 
evidenced in the support received from the Coalition of Labor Union Women and leading African 
American unionists.  
The reasons for these effects lie in the nature of the cause . The issues raised by the Pico 
unionists had such a strong human component that differences within the community became 
secondary to larger concerns for so cial justice and workers rights . The workers demands for 
compensation and respect were unencumbered  with strong ideological trappings . The 
economic exploitation faced by the Pico workers underscored the common interests of Korean  LSAT  897 
 workers , Korean Americans, the working class more inclusively , and a broad spectrum of 
community leaders . 
The Pico workers campaign thus offers an importan t lesson. It demonstrates that ethnic 
communities need more than just a knowledge of history and culture as artifacts of the past in 
order to strengthen their ethnic identity. It shows that perhaps the most effective means of 
empowerment for many ethnic co mmunities of immigrant derivation may be an identification 
with and participation in current struggles for economic and social justice in their countries of 
origin.  
7. Which one of the following best describes the main topic of the passage?  
(A) the contrib ution of the Korean American community to improving the 
working conditions of Koreans employed by United States companies  
(B) the change brought about in the Korean American community by contacts 
with Koreans visiting the United States  
(C) the contribution  of recent immigrants from Korea to strengthening ethnic 
identity in the Korean American community  
(D) the effects on the Korean American community of a dispute between Korean 
union workers and a United States company  
(E) the effect of the politicizatio n of second -generation Korean Americans on the 
Korean American community as a whole  
8. The passage suggests that which one of the following was a significant factor in 
the decision to shut down the Pico plant in Buchon City?  
(A) the decreasing profitabilit y of maintaining operations in Korea  
(B) the failure to resolve long -standing disputes between the Pico workers and 
management  
(C) the creation of a union by the Pico workers  
(D) the withholding of workers wages by the parent company  
(E) the finding of an alternate site for operations  
9. Which one of the following is NOT mentioned in the passage as a recent 
development in the Korean American community?  
(A) Young second -generation Korean Americans have begun to take an interest in 
their Korean heritage . 
(B) Recent Korean American immigrants of working -class backgrounds have 
begun to enter the more privileged sectors of the Korean American 
community . 
(C) Korean Americans have developed closer ties with activist groups from other 
secto rs of the population . 
(D) Previously nonpolitical members of the Korean American community have 
become more politically active . 
(E) The Korean American community has been able to set aside political and 
generational disparities in order to support a common cause . 898 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 10. It can be inferred that the author of the passage would most likely agree with 
which one of the following statem ents about ethnic communities of immigrant 
derivation?  
(A) Such communities can derive important benefits from maintaining ties with 
their countries of origin . 
(B) Such communities should focus primarily on promoting study of the history 
and culture of the ir people in order to strengthen their ethnic identity . 
(C) Such communities can most successfully mobilize and politicize  their young 
people by addressing the problems of young people of all backgrounds . 
(D) The more privileged sectors of such communities  are most likely to maintain 
a sense of closeness to their cultural roots.  
(E) The politicization of such a community is unlikely to affect relations with 
other groups within the larger society . 
11. In the second paragraph, the author refers to immigran ts from China most 
probably in order to do which one of the following?  
(A) highlight the contrast between working conditions in the United States and in 
Korea  
(B) demonstrate the uniqueness of the problem faced by the Pico workers  
(C) offer an example of t he type of role that can be played by recent 
working -class immigrants  
(D) provide an analogy for the type of activism displayed by the Korean 
American community  
(E) compare the disparate responses of two immigrant communities to similar 
problems  
12. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) describe recent developments in the Korean American community that have 
strongly affected other ethnic communities of immigrant derivation  
(B) describe a situation in the Korean American community that presents a model 
for the empowerment of ethnic communities of immigrant derivation  
(C) detail the problems faced by the Korean American community in order to 
illustrate the  need for the empowerment of ethnic communities of immigrant 
derivation  
(D) argue against economic and social injustice in the countries of origin of 
ethnic communities of immigrant derivation  
(E) assess the impact of the unionization movement on ethnic communities of 
immigrant derivation  
13. Which one of the following most accurately states the function of the third 
paragraph?  
(A) It explains why the Pico workers brought their cause to the United States .  LSAT  899 
 (B) It explains how the Pico cause differed from other causes that had previously 
mobilized the Korean American community . 
(C) It explains why the Pico workers were accorded such broad support . 
(D) It explains how other ethnic groups of immi grant derivation in the United 
States have profited from the example of the Pico workers . 
(E) It explains why different generations of Korean Americans reacted in different 
ways to the Pico cause . 
In recent years , scholars have begun to use social science  tools to analyze court opinions. 
These scholars have justifiably criticized traditional legal research for its focus on a few cases 
that may not be representative and its fascination with arcane matters that do not affect real 
people with real legal problems. Zirkel and Schoenfeld, for examp le, have championed the 
application of social science tools to the analysis of case law  surrounding discrimination against 
women in higher education employment . Their studies have demonstrated how these social 
science tools may be used to serve the interests of scholars , lawyers and prospective plaintiffs 
as well . However , their enth usiasm for the outcomes analys is technique seems misguided.  
Of fundamental concern is the outcomes analys ts assumption that simply counting the 
number of successful and unsuccessful plaintiffs will be useful to prospective plaintiffs . 
Although the odds are clearly against the plaintiff in sex discrimination cases, plaintiffs who 
believe that their cause is just and that they will prevail are not swayed by such evidence . In 
addition, because lawsuits are so different in the details of the case , in the qua lity of the 
evidence the plaintiff presents , and in the attitude of the judge toward academic plaintiffs , 
giving prospective plaintiffs statistics about overall outcomes without analyzing the reason for 
these outcomes is of marginal assistance . Outcomes an alysis , for example , ignores the fact that 
in certain academic sex discrimination cases those involving serious procedural violations or 
incriminating  evidence in the form of written admissions of discriminatory practices plaintiffs 
are much more likely to  prevail.  
Two different approaches offer more useful applications of social science tools in analyzing 
sex discrimination cases . One is a process called policy capturing , in which the researcher 
reads each opinion , identifies variables discussed in the o pinion , such as the regularity of 
employer evaluations of the plaintiff performance , training of evaluators , and the kind of 
evaluation instrument used , and then uses multivariate analysis  to determine whether these 
variables predict the outcome of the lawsuit . The advantage of policy capturing research is that 
it attempts to explain  the reason for the outcome , rather than simply reporting  the outcome , 
and identifies factors that co ntribute to a plaintiffs success or failure . Taking a slightly different 
approach, other scholars have adopted a technique that requires reading complete transcripts 
of all sex discrimination cases litigated during a certain time period to identify variab les such as 
the nature  of the allegedly illegal conduct , the consequences  for employers , and the nature  of 
the remedy , as well as the factors that contributed to the verdict and the kind of evidence 
necessary for the plaintiff to prevail . While the finding s of these studies are limited to the period 
covered , they assist potential plaintiffs and defendants in assessing their cases.  
14. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) The analysis of a limited number of atypical dis crimination suits is of little 900 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 value to potential plaintiffs . 
(B) When the number of factors analyzed in a sex discrimination suit is increased , 
the validity of the conclusions drawn becomes suspect . 
(C) Scholars who are critical of traditional legal resea rch frequently offer 
alternative approaches that are also seriously flawed . 
(D) Outcomes analysis has less predictive value in sex discrimination cases than 
do certain other social science techniques . 
(E) Given adequate information, it is possible to pr edict with considerable 
certainty whether a plaintiff will be successful in a discrimination suit . 
15. It can be inferred from the authors discussion of traditional legal research that 
the author is  
(A) frustrated because traditional legal research has no t achieved its full potential  
(B) critical because traditional legal research has little relevance to those actually 
involved in cases  
(C) appreciative of the role traditional legal research played in developing later 
more efficient approaches  
(D) derisive  because traditional legal research has outlasted its previously 
significant role  
(E) grateful for the ability of traditional legal research to develop unique types of 
evidence  
16. Which one of the following statements about Zirkel and Schoenfeld can be  
inferred from the passage?  
(A) They were the first scholars to use social science tools in analyzing legal 
cases . 
(B) They confined their studies to the outcomes analysis technique.  
(C) They saw no value in the analysis provided by traditional legal resea rch. 
(D) They rejected policy capturing as being too limited in scope . 
(E) They believed that the information generated by outcomes analysis would be 
relevant for plaintiffs.  
17. The authors characterization of traditional legal research in the first paragraph is 
intended to  
(A) provide background information for the sub sequent discussion  
(B) summarize an opponents position  
(C) argue against the use of social science tools in the analysis of sex 
discrimination cases  
(D) emphasize the fact that legal researchers act to the detriment of  potential 
plaintiffs  
(E) reconcil e traditional legal researchers to the use of social science tools  
18. The information in the passage suggests that plaintiffs who pursue sex  LSAT  901 
 discrimination cases despite t he statistics provided by outcomes analysis can best 
be likened  to 
(A) athletes who continue to employ training techniques despite their knowledge 
of statistical evidence indicating that these techniques are unlikely to be 
effective  
(B) lawyers who handle lawsuits for a large number of clients in the hope that 
some percentage will be successful  
(C) candidates for public office who are more interested in making a political 
statement than in winning an election  
(D) supporters of a cause who recruit individuals sympathetic to it in the belief 
that large number s of supporters will lend the cause legitimacy  
(E) purchasers of a charitys raffle tickets who consider the purchase a 
contribution because the likelihood of winning is remote  
19. The policy -capturing approach differs from the approach described in lines 48 -59 
in that the latter approach  
(A) makes  use of detailed information on a greater number of cases  
(B) focuses more directly on issues of concern to litigants  
(C) analyzes information that is more recent and therefore reflects current trends  
(D) allows assessment of aspects of a case that are not  specifically mentioned in a 
judges opinion  
(E) eliminates any distortion due to personal bias on the part of the researcher  
20. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A technique is introduced, its shortcomings are summarized, and alternatives 
are describ ed. 
(B) A debate is introduced, evidence is presented, and a compromise is reached . 
(C) A theory is presented, clarification is provided, and a plan of further 
evaluation is suggested . 
(D) Standards are established, hypothetical examples are analyzed, and the 
criteria are amended . 
(E) A position is challenged, its shortcomings are categorized, and the challenge 
is revised . 
A fake can be defined as an artwork intended to deceive. The motives of its creator are 
decisive, and the merit of the object itself is a separate issue. The question mark in the title of 
Mark Joness Fake? The Act of Deception  reveals the studys broader concerns . Indeed, it might 
equally be entitled Original? , and the text begins by noting a variety of possibilities somewhere 
between the two extremes. These i nclude works by an artists followers in the style of the 
master , deliberate archaism, copying for pedagogical purposes, and the production of 
commercial facsimiles . 
The greater part of Fake?  is devoted to a Chronological survey suggesting that faking feeds 
on the many different motives people have for collecting art, and that, on the whole, the faking 902 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 of art flourishes whenever art collecting flourishes. In imperial Rome there was a widespread 
interest in collecting earlier Greek art, and therefore in faking it. No doubt many of the 
sculptures now exhibited as Roman copies were originally passed off  as Greek. In medieval 
Europe , because art was celebrated mor e for its devotional uses than for its provenance or the 
ingenuity of its creators , the faking of art was virtually nonexistent. The modern age of faking 
began in the Italian Renaissance, with two linked developments : a passionate identification 
with the w orld of antiquity and a growing sense of individual artistic identity . A patron of the 
young Michelangelo prevailed upon  the artist to make his Sculpture Sleeping C upld look as 
though it had been buried in the earth so that it will be taken for antique, and you will sell it 
much better . Within a few years , however , beginning with his first masterpiece , the Bacchus , 
Michelangelo had shown his contemporaries that great art can assimilate a nd transcend what 
came before , resulting in a wholly original work. Soon his genius made him the object  of 
imitators.  
Fake?  also reminds u s that in certain cultures authenticity is a foreign concept . This is true 
of much African art , when the authenticity of an object is considered by collectors to depend on 
its function . As an illustration, the study compares two versions of a chi wara mask made by the 
Bambara  people of Mali . One has pegs allowing it to be attached to a cap for its intended 
ceremonial purpose. The second, otherwise identical , lacks the pegs and is a replica made for 
sale. African carving is notoriously difficult to date, but even if the ritual mask is recent, made 
perhaps to replace a damaged predecessor, and the replica much older, only the ritual mask 
should be seen as authentic , for it is tied to the forms original fu nction. That , at least , is the 
consensus of the so -called experts. One wonders whether the Bambaran artists would agree.  
21. The passage can best be described as doing which one of the following?  
(A) reconciling varied points of view  
(B) chronicling the ev olution of a phenomenon  
(C) exploring a complex question  
(D) advocating a new approach  
(E) rejecting an inadequate explanation  
22. Which one of the following best expresses the authors main point? (the text 
begins by noting a variety of possibilities somewhere between the two extremes. 
These include works by an artists followers in the style of the master , deliberate 
archaism, copying for pedagogical purposes, and the production of commercial 
facsimiles ) 
(A) The faking of art has occurred throughout history and in virtually every 
culture.  
(B) Whether a work of art is fake or not is less important than whether it has 
artistic merit . 
(C) It is possible to show that a work of art is fake, but the authenticity of a work 
cannot be proved conclusively . 
(D) A variety of circumstances make it difficult to determine whether a work of 
art can appro priately be called a fake .  LSAT  903 
 (E) Without an international market to support it, the faking of art would cease.  
23. According to the passage an artwork can be definitively classified as a fake if the 
person who created it  
(A) consciously adopted the artist ic style of an influential mentor  
(B) deliberately imitated a famous work of art as a learning exercise  
(C) wanted other people to be fooled by its appearance  
(D) made multiple, identical copies of the work available for sale  
(E) made the work resemble the art of an earlier era  
24. The author provides at least one example of each of the following EXCEPT:  
(A) categories of art that are neither wholly fake not wholly original  
(B) cultures in which the faking of art flourished  
(C) qualities that art collect ors have prized in their acquisitions  
(D) cultures in which the categories fake and original do not apply  
(E) contemporary artists whose works have inspired fakes  
25. The author implies which one of the following about the artistic merits of fakes?  
(A) Because of the circumstances of its production , a fake cannot be said to have 
true artistic merit . 
(B) A fake can be said to have artistic merit only if the attempted deception is 
successful . 
(C) A fake may or may not have artistic merit in its own right, regardless of the 
circumstances of its production . 
(D) Whether a fake has artistic merit depends on wheth er its creator is 
accomplished as an artist . 
(E) The artistic merit of a fake depends on the merit of the original work that 
inspired the fake . 
26. By the standard described in the last paragraph of the passage, which one of the 
following would be considered authentic?  
(A) an ancient Roman copy o f an ancient Greek sculpture  
(B) a painting begun by Renaissance master and finished by his assistants after 
his death  
(C) a print of a painting signed by the artist who painted the original  
(D) a faithful replica of a ceremonial crown that preserves all t he details of and is 
indistinguishable from the original  
(E) a modern reconstruction of a medieval altarpiece  designed to serve its 
traditional role in a service of worship  
27. Which one of the following best describes how the last paragraph functions in the 
context of the passage?  
(A) It offers a tentative answer to a question posed by the author in the opening 904 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 paragraph . 
(B) It summarizes an account provided in detail in the preceding paragraph . 
(C) It provides additional support for an argument advanced by the author in the 
precedin g paragraph . 
(D) It examines another facet of a distinction developed in the preceding 
paragraphs . 
(E) It affirms the general principle enunciated at the beginning of the passage . 
LSAT   22    SECTION IV  
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is st ated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
Many literary scholars believe that Zora Neale Hurstons Their Eyes Were Watching God  
(1937) has been the primary influence on some of the most accomplished Black women writing 
in the United States today . Indeed, Alice Walker, the author of the prize -winning novel The 
Color Purple , has said of Their Eyes , There is no book more important to me than this one. 
Thus, it seems necessary to ask why Their Eyes , a work now viewed by a multitude of readers 
as remarkably successful in its complex depiction of a Black womans search for self and 
community , was ever relegated  to the margins of the literary canon.  
The details of the novels initial reception help answer this question. Unlike the recently 
rediscovered  and reexamined work of Harriet Wilson, Their Eyes was not totally ignored by 
book reviewers upon its publication. In fact, it received a mixture of positive and negative 
reviews both from White book reviewers working for prominent periodicals and from imp ortant 
figures within Black literary circles . In the Saturday Review of Literature , George Stevens wrote 
that the narration is exactly right, because most of it is dialogue and the dialogue gives us a 
constant sense of character in action . The negative c riticism was partially a result of Hurstons 
ideological differences with other members of the Black Americans in literature. Black writers of 
the 1940s believed that the Black artists primary responsibility was to create protest fiction that 
explored the  negative effects of racism in the United States. For example, Richard Wright, the 
author of the much acclaimed Native Son  (1940) , wrote that Their Eyes  had no theme and 
no message . Most criti cs and readers expectations of Black literature rendered t hem unable 
to appreciate Hurstons subtle delineation of the life of an ordinary Black woman in a Black 
community and the novel went quietly out of print . 
Recent acclaim for Their Eyes  results from the emergence of feminist lit erary criticism and 
the development of standards of evaluation specific to the work of Black writers; these kinds of 
criticism changed readers expectations of art and enabled them to appreciate Hurstons novel . 
The emergence of feminist criticism was cruc ial because such criticism brought new attention 
to neglected works such as Hurstons and alerted readers to Hurstons exploration of womens 
issues in her fiction. The Afrocentric standards of evaluation were equally important to the 
rediscovery of Their Eyes, for such standards provided readers with the tools to recognize and  LSAT  905 
 appreciate the Black folklore and oral storytelling traditions Hurston incorporated within her 
work. In one of the most illuminating discussions of the novel to date, Henry Louis Gat es Jr. , 
states that Hurstons strategy seems to concern itself with the possibilities of representation of 
the speaking Black voice in writing.  
1. The passage suggests which one of the following about Harriet Wilsons novel?  
(A) It was written at the sam e time as Their Eyes Were Watching God , but it did 
not receive as much critical attention.  
(B) It greatly influenced Black women writing after the 1940s.  
(C) It was widely read when it was published but it has not received attention 
from literary critics u ntil recently.  
(D) It was not formally published, and the manuscript has only recently been 
discovered by literary critics.  
(E) It did not receive critical attention when it was published, but it has recently 
become the subject of critical study.  
2. The passage offers support for which one of the following statements about 
literary reviewers and Their Eyes Were Watching God ? 
(A) Their Eyes  was widely acclaimed by reviewers upon its publication , even 
though it eventually went out of print.  
(B) The eventual obscurity of Their Eyes  was not the result of complete neglect 
by reviewers . 
(C) Some early reviewers of Their Eyes  interpreted the novel from a point of view 
that later became known as Afrocentric . 
(D) Their Eyes  was more typical of the protest fiction of the 1940s than reviewers 
realized . 
(E) Most early reviewers of Their Eyes  did not respond positively to the book.  
3. Which one of the following best states the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Hurstons Their Eyes Were Watching God  had little in common with novels 
written by Blank authors during the 1940s.  
(B) Feminist critics and authors such as Alice Walker were instrumental in 
establishing Hurstons Their Eyes Were Watching God  as an important part 
of the American literary canon.  
(C) Critics and readers were unable to appreciate fully Hu rstons Their Eyes Were 
Watching God  until critics applied new standards of evaluation to the novel . 
(D) Hurstons Their Eyes Were Watching God  was an important influence on the 
protest fiction written by Black writers in the mid -twentieth century.  
(E) Afrocentric strategies of analysis have brought attention to the use of oral 
storytelling traditions in novels written by Black Americans such as 
Hurstons Their Eyes Were Watching God . 
4. According to the passage which one of the following is true  of Black folklore 906 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 traditions as used in literature written in the United States?  
(A) They are an aspect of Black American literature first recognized and written 
about by Henry Louis Gates , Jr. 
(B) They were not widely incorporated into novels written by Black Americans 
until after the 1940s . 
(C) They were first used by a novelist in Zora Neale Hurstons Their Eyes Were 
Watching God . 
(D) They were not incorporated into novels published by Black Americans in the 
1940s . 
(E) They are an aspect of Black literature that some readers did not fully 
appreciate until relatively recently . 
5. The passage suggests that Native Son  differs from Their Eyes Were Watching God  
in which one of the following ways?  
(A) It received fewer  positive reviews at the time of its publication than did Their 
Eyes . 
(B) It is less typical of literature written by Black Americans during the 1940s 
than is Their Eyes . 
(C) It is less focused on an ordinary individuals search for self within a Black 
community than is Then Eyes.  
(D) It denies more aspects of Black American folklore than does Their Eyes . 
(E) It has received more attention from feminist and Afrocentric literary critics 
than Their Eyes . 
6. Which one of the following provides the clearest example of the kind of fiction 
that many Black writers of the 1940s, as their views are described in the passage, 
believed should be written?  
(A) a novel that focuses on the interrelationships among four generations of Black 
women  
(B) a historical novel that re -creates actual events that occurred as Black people 
suffered from oppression and racial injusti ce in a small town  
(C) a novel, based on biographical stories orally relayed to the author as a child, 
that describes the development of traditions in a Black family  
(D) a novel that explores the psychological aspects of a relationship between a 
White man and a Black man as they work together to organize protests 
against unjust working conditions  
(E) a novel that examines the different ways in which three Black children 
experience their first day of school in a rural community  
7. The author would be most  likely to agree with which one of the following 
statements about the relationship between art and literary criticism?  
(A) The long -term reputation of a work of art is less dependent on the response of 
literary critics than on the response of readers and a uthors .  LSAT  907 
 (B) Experimental works of fiction are usually poorly received and misunderstood 
by literary critics when they are first published . 
(C) The response of literary critics to a work of art can be determined by certain 
ideological perspectives and assum ptions about the purpose of art . 
(D) Literary critics do not significantly affect the way most people interpret and 
appreciate literature.  
(E) The ideological bases of a work of art are the first consideration of most 
literary critics.  
8. The primary pu rpose of the passage is to  
(A) correct a misconception  
(B) explain a reassessment  
(C) reconcile two points of view  
(D) criticize a conventional approach  
(E) announce a new discovery  
Legal cases can be termed hard cases if they raise issues that are hi ghly controversial, 
issues about which people with legal training disagree. The ongoing debate over the 
completeness of the law usually concerns the extent to which such hard cases are legally 
determinate, or decidable according to existing law.  
H. L. A. Harts The Concept of Law  is still the clearest and most persuasive statement of 
both the  standard theory of hard cases and the standard theory of law on which it rests. For 
Hart the law consists of legal rules formulated in general terms ; these terms he ca lls open 
textured which means that they contain a core of settled meaning and a penumbra or 
periphery where their meaning is not determinate. For example, suppose an ordinance 
prohibits the use of vehicles in a park. Vehicle has a core of meaning  which includes cars and 
motorcycles. But , Hart claims, other vehicles, such as bicycles, fall within the peripheral 
meaning of vehicle , so that the law does not establish whether they are prohibited. There will 
always be cases not covered by the core me aning of legal terms within existing laws. Hart 
considers these cases to be legally indeterminate. Since courts cannot decide such cases on 
legal grounds , they must consider nonlegal (for example, moral and political) grounds, and 
thereby exercise judicial  discretion to make, rather than apply law.  
In Ronald Dworkins view the law is richer than Hart would grant: he denies that the law 
consists solely of explicit rules. The law also includes principles that do not depend  for their 
legal status on any prior official recognition or enactment . Dworkin claims that many cases 
illustrate the existence of legal principles that are different from legal rules and that  Harts 
model of rules cannot accommodate. For Dworkin, legal rules apply in an all -or-nothing fashio n, 
whereas legal principles do not ; they provide the rationale for applying legal rules. Thus, 
because Dworkin thinks there is law in addition to legal rules, he thinks that legal indeterminacy 
and the need for judicial discretion do not follow from  the existence of open texture in legal 
rules.  
It would be a mistake, though, to dispute Harts theory of hard cases on this basis alone . If 
Harts claim about the open texture of general terms is true, then we should expect to fi nd 908 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 legal indeterminacies even if the law consists of principles in addition to rules . Legal principles 
as well as legal rules contain general terms that have open texture. And it would be absurd to 
suppose that wherever the meaning of a legal rule is uncle ar, there is a legal principle with a 
clear meaning . Most interesting and controversial cases will occur in the penumbra of both rules 
and principles.  
9. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) The law will never be comp lete because new situations will always arise 
which will require new laws to resolve them.  
(B) The most difficult legal cases are those concerning controversial issues about 
which trained legal minds have differing opinions.  
(C) The concept of legal princi ples does not diminish the usefulness of the 
concept of the open texture of general terms in deciding whether hard cases 
are legally determinate.  
(D) The concept of legal principles is a deleterious addition to the theory of law 
since any flaws exhibited b y legal rules could also be shared by legal 
principles.  
(E) The inherent inconsistency of terms used in laws provides a continuing 
opportunity for judges to exercise their discretion to correct defect and gaps 
in the law.  
10. According to the passage th e term legal principles as used by Dworkin refers to  
(A) a comprehensive code of ethics that governs the behavior of professionals in 
the legal system  
(B) explicit analyses of the terms used in legal rules indicating what meanings the 
terms do and do not  cover  
(C) legal doctrines that underlie and guide the use of accepted legal rules  
(D) legal rules that have not yet passed through the entire legislative procedure 
necessary for them to become law  
(E) the body of legal decisions regarding cases that required judicial discretion for 
their resolution  
11. Which one of the following expresses a view that the author of the passage would 
most probably hold concerning legal principles and legal rules?  
(A) Legal rules are applied more often than legal principles when a case involves 
issues about which legal professionals disagree.  
(B) Both legal rules and legal principles are officially recognized as valid parts of 
the law.  
(C) Harts model of rules ha s been superseded by a model of principles that 
sheds light on legal determinacy.  
(D) Legal principles are just as likely as legal rules to have terms that have both 
core and peripheral meanings . 
(E) Legal principles eliminate the need for judicial discretion in resolving the  LSAT  909 
 problems generated by the open texture of legal rules.  
12. In the passage, the author uses the example of the word vehicle to  
(A) illustrate a legal rule that necessaril y has exceptions  
(B) show how legal principles are applied in the construction of legal rules  
(C) represent the core of settled meaning of a legal term  
(D) serve as an example of a legal term with both a core and a periphery of 
meaning  
(E) provide a cou nterexample to Harts concept of the open texture of legal terms  
13. It can be inferred that the author of the passage regards Harts theory of hard 
cases and the theory of standard law as  
(A) exhaustive  
(B) worthy of respect  
(C) interesting but impractica l 
(D) plausible but unwieldy  
(E) hopelessly outmoded  
14. Which one of the following is true of the term legally determinate (line 6) as it 
is used in the passage?  
(A) It represents the idea that every crime should have a fixed penalty rather than 
a range of penalties within whic h a judge can make an arbitrary choice . 
(B) It refers to a legal case that can be definitively resolved in favor of one side or 
the other according to the law in effect at the time . 
(C) It describes a legal rule that requires judges to limit their actions to applying 
written law when deciding cases over which people with legal training 
disagree . 
(D) It refers to any legal case that involves terms with imprecise meanings and 
thus relies for its resolution only on the determination of judges.  
(E) It refers to procedures for determining the legal outcome of complex issues in 
difficult cases.  
15. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with  
(A) outlining the problems that might be faced by a legislature attempting to 
create a comple te body of law that would prevent judges from making rather 
than applying the law  
(B) justifying the idea that hard cases will always exist in the practice of law, 
no matter what laws are written or how they are applied  
(C) presenting evidence to support  Dworkins idea that legal rules apply in an 
all-or-nothing fashion whereas legal principles apply in more sophisticated 
ways  
(D) critiquing the concept of the open texture of legal terms as a conceptual flaw 
in Harts otherwise well -regarded book  910 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (E) demonstrating that Dworkins concept of legal principles does not form the 
basis for a successful attack on Harts theory of legally indeterminate cases  
One way governments can decrease air pollution  is to impose a tax on in dustrial carbon 
dioxide emissions. But why should governments consider a carbon tax  when they could control 
emissions by establishing energy efficiency and conservation standards, by legislating against 
coal use , or by increasing inv estment in nuclear? The great virtue of such a tax is that it would 
provide incentives for industry to achieve emission reductions. Because oil emits more carbon 
dioxide per unit of energy generated than does natural gas, and coal more than oil , a carbon 
tax would vary with the type of fuel. Such a tax would induce industry to substitute  
less-polluting fuels for those carrying a higher tax and also to reduce the total use of energy  
However , it is not clear how high such a tax should be or what its economic and 
environmental implications would be. At first glance , it is not difficult to estimate roughly the 
size of the tax needed to effect  a given level of emission reduction. One writer estimates , for 
example , that a tax of 41 percent on  the price of coal , 33 percent on oil , and 25 percent on gas 
would reduce the United Kingdoms emissions by 20 percent (using 1988 as the base year) by 
the year 2005 , the target recommended by the 1988 Toronto Conference. It should be noted , 
however , that these numbers ignore the effect of the tax on economic growth, and hence on 
emissions, and assume that past responses to a price rise will be replicated in the future . These 
numbers are also based on the assumption that all countries will behave cooperativ ely in 
imposing a carbon tax.  
There are very strong reasons to believe that cooperation would be difficult to win. If most 
countries cooperated, then any country that chose not to cooperate would be advantaged : it 
would have no abatement costs, and the eff ect on the environment of its defection would be 
relatively small. Because of this  free rider  effect , cooperation on a scale needed to reduce 
carbon dioxide emissions might pro ve elusive.  
Should countries act unilaterally to curb emissions? If a country were to act unilaterally , 
the benefits would be spread across the globe, whereas the costs would fall solely on the 
country taking the action. The action would reduce emissions g lobally , and the effect of this 
would be to reduce the benefit other countries would receive if they reduced emissions.  As a 
consequence , other countries would have less incentive to reduce emissions and would 
probably emit more carbon dioxide than they wo uld have if the unilateral action had not been 
taken. The entire effect of the emission reduction may not be lost, but it would surely be 
diminished by this free -riding behavior.  
16. According to the passage, the size of the carbon tax levied on a given fu el would 
vary with the  
(A) amount of that fuel used by a particular industry  
(B) amount of pollution caused by the fuel being taxed  
(C) size of the industries using the fuel being taxed  
(D) effect that the tax would have on a countrys economy  
(E) number of users of a particular fuel at a particular time  
17. The author mentions the estimates of One writer (line 22) primarily in order to   LSAT  911 
 (A) indicate in a general way  the size that a carbon tax must be for it to b e 
effective  
(B) provide the most accurate information available about the most practical size 
for a carbon tax  
(C) suggest that the target recommended by the 1988 Toronto Conference is an 
unrealistic one  
(D) undermine the argument that a carbon tax would p rovide incentives for users 
to achieve emissions reductions  
(E) show how the size of an effective carbon tax can be calculated  
18. Which one of the following circumstances would most seriously undermine the 
conclusion Such a tax would induce industry to substitute less -polluting fuels for 
those carrying a high er tax (lines 13 -15) 
(A) The fuel taxed a the highest rate costs considerably less to buy than fuels 
taxed at lower rates . 
(B) The goal set by the Toronto Conference cannot be reached unless each fuel it 
taxed at a much higher rate . 
(C) The tax on coal re presents a much greater cost increase than does the tax on 
oil or gas . 
(D) It is discovered that gas produces even less carbon dioxide per unit of energy 
generated than was previously thought.  
(E) It is discovered that coal produces even more carbon dioxide per unit of 
energy generated than are previously thought.  
19. The passage is primarily intended to answer which one of the following 
questions?  
(A) How high a tax should a countrys gover nment impose on carbon dioxide 
emissions?  
(B) What issues should a countrys government consider before deciding whether 
to impose a tax on carbon dioxide emissions?  
(C) What assumptions underlie a countrys decision to impose a tax on carbon 
dioxide emiss ions?  
(D) How can the effects of industrial pollution on the Earths atmosphere be 
decreased?  
(E) What can be done to increase the effectiveness of any tax that a country 
imposes on carbon dioxide emissions?  
20. In response to the question. Should countries act unilaterally to curb emissions? 
(lines 44-45) the author would be most likely to c ontend that a country should  
(A) not act unilaterally because , although that country would receive some 
benefits from such action , other countries would most likely be harmed by it  
(B) not act unilaterally because unilateral action would have no benefits f or other 
countries  912 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (C) not act unilaterally because the cost to that country would not be justified by 
the limited effect that such action would have on industrial pollution 
worldwide  
(D) act unilaterally because that countrys economy would benefit from t he 
resulting reduction in industrial emissions worldwide  
(E) act unilaterally because other countries might well be inspired to follow that 
countrys example  
21. Which one of the following is most parallel to the free rider effect mentioned in 
line 41 ? 
(A) An industry agrees to base itself in a city where there has been little industrial 
development only if the city will rezone  the specific property the industry 
desires.  
(B) Because fares for public transportation are rising , a commuter decides to 
bicycle to work rather than to use public transportation i n a city where auto 
emissions are a problem . 
(C) An apartment dweller begins to recycle newspapers even though no one else 
in the building does so and recycling is not required by law . 
(D) In an area wh ere groundwater has become polluted , a homeowner continues 
to buy bottled water rather than contribute to a neighborhood fund to combat 
pollution . 
(E) In an area where overgrazing is a severe problem , a shepherd allows his sheep 
to continue grazing comm on field even though his neighbors have agreed to 
buy feed for their animals until regrowth occurs . 
Some meteorologists have insisted that the severity of the drought in sub -Saharan West 
Africa and its long duration (nearly 40 years to date) must be a sign  of a long term alteration in 
climate . Among the theories proposed to explain this change , one hypothesis that has gained 
widespread attention attributes the drought to a cooling of the Northern Hemisphere. This 
hypothesis is based on the fact that between  1945 and the early 1970s , the average annual air 
temperatures over the landmasses of the Northern Hemisphere decreased by about half a 
degree Fahrenheit (approximately one quarter of a degree Celsius a small but significant 
amount). Several meteorologists  have suggested that this cooling was caused by an increase in 
atmospheric dust emanating from volcanic eruptions and from urban and industrial pollution : 
the dust reflected incoming sunlight , causing the ground to receive less solar radiation and to 
transfer less heat to the atmosphere. The cooling seemed to be more pronounced in the middle 
and high latitudes than in the tropics , an observation that is consistent with the fact that the 
Suns rays enter the atmosphere at a greater angle farther north and so  have to pass through 
more dust -laden atmosphere on the way  to the Earth.  
Since winds are set in motion  by differences in air pressure  caused by unequal heating of 
the atmosphere , supporters of the cooling hypothesis have argued that a growing temperature 
differential between the unusually cool middle and high latitudes and the warm tropical 
latitudes is causing a southward expansion of the circumpolar vortex the high -altitude 
westerly winds that circle the Northern Hemisphere at middle latitudes . According  to this  LSAT  913 
 hypothesis , as the circumpolar vortex expands, it forces south other components of large -scale 
atmospheric circulation and in effect displaces the northward -moving monsoon  that ord inarily 
brings sub-Saharan rain . Proponents have further argued that this change in atmospheric 
circulation might be long -term since cooling in the Northern Hemisphere could be perpetuated 
by increases in ice and snow coverage there , which would lead to re flection of more sunlight 
away from the Earth , to further  cooling , and, indirectly , to further drought in sub -Saharan West 
Africa.  
Despite these are predictions and even though the current African drought has lasted 
longer than any other in this cen tury, the notion that the drought is caused by cooling of the 
Northern Hemisphere is , in fact, not well supported . Contrary to the predictions of the cooling 
hypothesis, during one period of rapid Northern Hemisphere cooling in the early 1950s, the 
sub-Sahara was unusually rain y. Moreover , in the early 1980s, when the drought was 
particularly severe , Northern Hemisphere lands actually warmed slightly. And further doubt has 
been cast on the hypothesis by recent analyses suggesting that , when surface temperat ures of 
water as well as land are taken into account , the Northern Hemisphere may not have cooled at 
all. 
22. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) There is strong evidence to support the theory that an increase in atm ospheric 
dust has contributed to the severity of the drought in sub -Saharan West 
Africa . 
(B) The suggestion that Northern Hemisphere cooling is contributing to a decline 
of rainfall in sub -Saharan West Africa is open to question . 
(C) The expansion of the c ircumpolar vortex has caused a dramatic shift in the 
atmospheric circulation patterns above sub -Saharan West Africa . 
(D) The drought in sub -Saharan West Africa represents a long -term permanent 
alteration in global climate patterns . 
(E) Meteorologists ca nnot determine when the drought in sub -Saharan West 
Africa is likely to end . 
23. The authors attitude toward the cooling hypothesis is best described as one of  
(A) vehement opposition  
(B) cautious skepticism  
(C) growing ambivalence  
(D) guarded enthusiasm  
(E) strong support  
24. According to the passage proponents of the cooling hypothesis suggested that the 
circumpolar vortex is likely to expand when which one of the following occurs?  
(A) The average annual atmospheric temperature of the tropics is signi ficantly 
higher than normal for an extended period of time.  
(B) The average annual snowfall in the Northern Hemisphere is lower than 
normal for an extended period of time.  914 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (C) The average annual surface temperature of Northern Hemisphere waters is 
higher t han the average annual surface temperature of Northern Hemisphere 
landmasses . 
(D) There is a significant increase in the difference between the average annual 
atmospheric temperature of the tropics and that of the more northern 
latitudes . 
(E) There is a significant increase in the difference between the average annual 
atmospheric temperatures of the middle and the high latitudes in the 
Northern Hemisphere . 
25. Which one of the following can be inferred from the passage about the average  
annual temperature of the air over Northern Hemisphere landmasses before 1945?  
(A) It was higher than it was between 1945 and the early 1970s.  
(B) It was lower than it was during the early 1980s.  
(C) It was the same as it was between 1945 and the early 19 70s. 
(D) It was the same as the annual average surface temperature of Northern 
Hemisphere landmasses and bodies of water between 1945 and the early 
1970s.  
(E) It was higher than the annual average surface temperature of Northern 
Hemisphere landmasses and bodies of water between 1945 and the early 
1970s.  
26. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) Opposing points of view are presented , evidence supporting each point of 
view is discussed , and then one point of view is developed into a formal 
hypothesis . 
(B) A theory is discussed and different points of view about the theory are 
discussed , supported and then reconciled . 
(C) A hypothesis is proposed , contradictory evidence is discussed and then the 
hypothesis is amended . 
(D) A theory explaining a phenomenon is proposed , supporting evidence is 
considered and then the theory is disputed . 
(E) A point of view is presented , a theory supporting the view is proposed , 
contradictory evidence is presented and then a different theory is proposed . 
27. A proponent of the cooling hypothesis would most likely argue that the return of 
the monsoon ra ins to sub -Saharan West Africa would indicate that which one of 
the following has also occurred?  
(A) The amount of ice and snow coverage over the landmasses of the Northern 
Hemisphere has increased . 
(B) The average annual temperature of the atmosphere over  the middle and high 
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere has decreased . 
(C) The average annual temperature of the atmosphere over the tropics in the  LSAT  915 
 Northern Hemisphere has increased . 
(D) Other components of large -scale atmospheric circulation besides the  
circumpolar vortex have expanded and moved southward . 
(E) The atmospheric circulation pattern of the high -altitude westerly winds has 
resumed its normal pattern . 
LSAT   23    SECTION III  
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this sec tion is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, tha t is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
 
Wherever the crime novels of P.  D. James are discussed by critics, there is a tendency on 
the one hand  to exaggerate her  merits and on the other  to castigate her as a genre writer who 
is getting above herself . Perhaps underlying the debate is that familiar, false opposition set up 
between different kinds of fiction, according to which enjoyable  novels are held to be somehow 
slightly lowbrow, and a novel is not considered true literature unless it is a tiny bit dull.  
Those commentators who would elevate James books to the status of high literature point 
to her painstakingly constructed character s, her elaborate settings, her sense of place, and her 
love of abstractions: notions about morality, duty, pain, and pleasure are never far from the lips 
of her police officers and murderers. Others find her pretentious and tiresome; an inverted 
snobbery a ccuses her of abandoning the time -honored conventions of the detective genre in 
favor of a highbrow literary style. The critic Harriet Waugh wants P.  D. James to get on with  the 
more taxing  business of laying a tric ky trail and then fooling the reader ; Philip Oakes in The 
Literary Review  groans, Could we please proceed with  the business of clapping the handcuffs 
on the killer?  
James is certainly capable of strikingly good writing. She takes immense trouble to provide 
her characters with convincing histories and passions. Her descriptive digressions are part of 
the pleasure of her books and give them dignity and weight. But it is equally true that they 
frequently interfere with the story; the patinas and aromas of a country kitchen receive more 
loving attention than does the plot itself. Her devices to advance the story can be shameless  
and thin, and it is often impossible to see how her detective arrives at the truth; one is left to 
conclude that the detective solves crimes through intuition. At this stage in her car eer P.  D. 
James seems to be less interested in the specifics of detection than in her characters 
vulnerabilities and perplexities.  
However, once the rules of a chosen genre cramp  creative thought, there is no reason why 
an able and interest ing writer should accept them. In her latest book, there are signs that 
James is beginning to feel constrained by the crime -novel genre, here her determination to 
leave areas of ambiguity in the solution of the crime and to distribute guilt among the murderer, 
victim, and bystanders points to conscious rebellion against the traditional neatness of 
detective fiction. It is fashionable, though reprehensible, for one wri ter to prescribe to another. 916 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 But perhaps the time has come for P.  D. James to slide out of her handcuffs and stride into the 
territory of the mainstream novel.  
1. Which one the following best states the authors main conclusion?  
(A) Because P.  D. Jamess p otential as a writer is stifled by her chosen genre, she 
should turn her talents toward writing mainstream novels.  
(B) Because the requirements of the popular novel are incompatible with true 
creative expression, P. D. Jamess promise as a serious author h as been 
diminished.  
(C) The dichotomy between popular and sophisticated literature is well illustrated 
in the crime novels of P. D. James.  
(D) The critics who have condemned P. D. Jamess lack of attention to the 
specifics of detection fail to take into ac count her carefully constructed plots.  
(E) Although her plots are not always neatly resolved, the beauty of her 
descriptive passages justifies P. D. Jamess decision to write in the 
crime -novel genre.  
2. The author refers to the patinas and aromas of a county kitchen line 32) most 
probabl y in order to  
(A) illustrate Jamess gift for innovative phrasing  
(B) highlight Jamess interest in rural society  
(C) allow the reader to experience the pleasure of Jamess books  
(D) explain how James typically constructs her plots  
(E) exemplify Jamess  preoccupation with descriptive writing  
3. The second paragraph serves primarily to  
(A) propose an alternative to two extreme opinions described earlier  
(B) present previously mentioned positions in greater detail  
(C) contradict an assertion cited previous ly 
(D) introduce a controversial interpretation  
(E) analyze a dilemma in greater depth  
4. The passage supports which one of the following statements about detective 
fiction?  
(A) There are as many different detective -novel conventions as there are writers 
of crime novels.  
(B) Detective fiction has be en characterized by extremely high literary quality.  
(C) Detective fiction has been largely ignored by literary critics.  
(D) There is very little agreement among critics about the basic elements of 
typical detective novel . 
(E) Writers of detective ficti on have customarily followed certain conventions in 
constructin g their novels .  LSAT  917 
 5. The passage suggests that both Waugh and Oakes consider Jamess novels to have  
(A) too much material that is extraneous to the solution of the crime  
(B) too little characteri zation to enable the reader to solve the crime  
(C) too few suspects to generate suspense  
(D) too simple a plot to hold the attention of the reader  
(E) too convoluted a plot for the reader to understand  
6. It can be inferred from the passage that, in the author s view, traditional detective 
fiction is characterized by  
(A) concern for the weaknesses and doubts of the characters  
(B) transparent devi ces to advance the plot  
(C) the attribution of intuition to the detective  
(D) the straightforward assignment of culpability for the crime  
(E) attention to the concepts of morality and responsibility  
7. The author characterizes the position of some criti cs as  inverted snobbery  (line 
17) because they hold which one of the following views?  
(A) Critics of literature must acknowledge that they are less talented than creators 
of literature . 
(B) Critics should hesitate to disparage popular authors . 
(C) P. D. Jamess novels should focus less on characters from the English landed 
gentry . 
(D) Detective fiction should be content to remain an unambiguous literary genre.  
(E) P. D. James should be less fastidious bout portraying violence . 
8. Which one of the follow quotations about literature best exemplifies the 
familiar attitude mentioned in lines 5 -9? 
(A) The fantasy and whimsy characteristic of this writers nove ls qualify them as 
truly great works of literature.  
(B) The greatest work of early English literature happens to be a highly 
humorous collection of tales.  
(C) A truly great work of literature should place demand upon its readers, rather 
than divert them . 
(D) Although many critics are condescending about best -selling novels, I would 
not wish to challenge the opinion of millions of readers.  
(E) A novel need only satisfy the requirements of its particular genre to be 
considered a true work of literature.  
Many Native Americans view the archaeological excavation and museum display of 
ancestral skeletal remains and items buried with them as  a spiritual desecration. A number of 
legal remedies that either prohibit or regulate such activities may be available to Native 
American communities, if they can establish standing  in such cases. I n disinterment cases, 
courts have traditionally affirmed the standing of three classes of plaintiffs: the deceaseds heirs, 918 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 the owner of the property on which the grave is located, and parties, including organizations or 
distant relatives o f the deceased, that have a clear interest in the preservation of a particular 
grave. If an archaeologically discovered grave is of recent historical origin and associated with 
an identifiable Native American community, Native Americans are likely to estab lish standing in 
a suit to prevent disinterment of the remains, but in cases where the grave is ancient and 
located in an area where the community of Native Americans associated with the grave has not 
recently lived, they are less likely to be successful in this regard . Indeed, in most cases involving 
ancient graves, to recognize that Native Americans have standing would represent a significant 
expansion of common law. In cases where standing can be achieved, however, common law  
may provide a basis for some Native American claims against archaeologists and museums.  
Property law, for example, can be useful in establishing Native American claims to artifacts 
that are retrieved in the excavation of ancient graves and  can be considered the communal 
property of Native American tribes or communities . In Charrier v. Bell , a United States appellate  
court ruled that the common law doctrine of abandonment, which allows the finder of 
abandoned property to claim ownership, does not apply to objects buried with the deceased. 
The court ruled that the practice of burying items with the body of the deceased is not 
intended as a means of relinquishing ownership to a stranger and that to interpret it as such 
could render a grave subject to despoliation either immediately after interment orafter 
removal of the descendants of the deceased from the neighborhood of the cemetery . This 
ruling suggests that artifacts excavated from Native American ancestral graves  should be 
returned to representatives of tribal groups who can establish standing in such cases.  
More generally, United Sates courts have upheld the distinction between individual and 
communal property, holding that an individual Native American does not have title to 
communal property owned and held for common use by his or her tribe. As a result, museums 
cannot assume that they have valid title to cultural property merely because they purchased in 
good faith an item that was originally sold in good faith  by an individual member of a Native 
American community.  
9. The primary purpose of the passage is to provide an answer t o which one of the 
following questions?  
(A) How should the legal protection of Native American burial grounds be  
enhanced?  
(B) What characteristics of Native American burial grounds enhance their 
chances for protection by the law?  
(C) In what ways does the law protect the rights of Native Americans in regards 
to the contents of ancestral graves?  
(D) Why are the cour ts concerned with protecting Native American burial 
grounds from desecration?  
(E) By what means can Native Americans establish their rights to land on which 
their ancestors are buried?  
10. It can be inferred that a court would be most likely to deny standing in a 
disinterment case to which one of the following Native American pl aintiffs?  
(A) one who seeks, as one of several beneficiaries of his fathers estate, to protect  LSAT  919 
 the father s burial site  
(B) one who seeks to prevent tenants on her land from taking artifacts from a 
grave located on the property  
(C) one who represents a tr ibe whose members hope to prevent the disinterment 
of remains from a distant location from which the tribe recently moved  
(D) one who seeks to have artifacts that have been removed from a grave 
determined to be that of her second cousin  returned to the grave  
(E) one who seeks the return of artifacts taken from the ancient burial grounds of 
disparate tribes and now displayed in a museum  
11. According to the passage, which one of the following is true of cases involving 
ancie nt graves?  
(A) Once a plaintiffs standing has been established, such cases are usually more 
difficult to resolve than are cases involving more recent graves.  
(B) The distinction between individual and communal property is usually an issue 
in such cases.  
(C) Even when a plaintiffs standing has been established, property law cannot be 
used as a basis for the claims of Native Americans in most such cases.  
(D) In most such cases, common law does not currently provide a clear basis for 
establishing that Native  Americans have standing.  
(E) Common law is rarely used as a basis for the claims of Native Americans who 
have established standing in such cases.  
12. The passage suggests that in making the ruling in Charrier v. Bell  the court is 
most likely to have co nsidered the answer to which one of the following 
questions?  
(A) Are the descendants of the deceased still alive?  
(B) What was the reason for burying the objects in question?  
(C) How long after interment had buried objects been claimed by stranger?  
(D) Did  the descendants of the deceased remain in the neighborhood of the 
cemetery?  
(E) Could the property on which buried objects were found be legally considered 
to be abandoned property?  
13. The author uses the second paragraph to  
(A) illustrate the content ion that common law may support the claims of Native 
Americans to the contents of ancestral graves  
(B) exemplify the difficulties that Native Americans are likely to encounter in 
claiming ancestral remains  
(C) introduce a discussion of the distinction betw een individual and communal 
property  
(D) confirm the contention that cases involving ancient graves present unresolved 920 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 legal problems  
(E) suggest that property law is applicable in most disinterment case s 
14. Which one of the following best expresses th e main idea of the passage?  
(A) Prior to an appellate courts ruling in Charrier v. Bell , Native Americans had 
no legal grounds for demanding the return of artifacts excavated from 
ancient graves . 
(B) Property law offers the most promising remedies to Nati ve Americans 
seeking to recover communally owned artifacts that were sold to museums 
without tribal authorization . 
(C) The older the grave, the more difficult it is for Native Americans to establish 
standing in cases concerning the disposition  of archaeolo gically excavated 
ancestral remains.  
(D) In cases in which Native Americans can establish standing, common law can 
be useful in protecting ancestral remains and the artifacts buried with them.  
(E) Native Americans are unlikely to make significant progre ss in the recovery of 
cultural property until common law is significantly expanded to provide 
them with standing in cases involving the excavation of ancient graves.  
When the same habitat types (forests, oceans, grasslands etc.) in regions of different 
latitudes are compared, it becomes apparent that the overall number of species increases from 
pole to equator. This latitudinal gradient is probably even more pronounced than current 
records indicate, since researchers believe that most undiscovered species l ive in the tropics . 
One hypothesis to explain this phenomenon, the time theory holds that diverse species 
adapted to todays climatic conditions have had more time to emerge in the tropical regions, 
which, unlike the temperate and arctic zones, have been  unaffected by a succession of  ice ages. 
However, ice ages have caused less disruption in some temperate regions than in others and 
have not interrupted arctic conditions.  
Alternatively, the species -energy hypothesis proposes the fol lowing positive correlations: 
incoming energy from the Sun correlated with rates of growth and reproduction; rates of 
growth and reproduction with the amount of living matter ( biomass ) at a given moment; and 
the amount of bioma ss with number of species. However, since organisms may die rapidly, high 
production rates can exist with low biomass. And high biomass can exist with few species. 
Moreover, the mechanism proposed greater energy influx leading to bigger populations, 
thereb y lowering the probability of local extinction remains untested.  
A third hypothesis centers on the tropics climatic stability, which provides a more reliable 
supply of resources. Species can thus survive even with few types of food, and competing 
species can tolerate gr eater overlap between their respective niches. Both capabilities enable 
more species to exist on the same resources. However, the ecology of local communities 
cannot account for the origin of the latitudinal gradient. Localized ecological pr ocesses such as 
competition do not generate regional pools of species, and it is the total number of species 
available regionally for colonizing any particular area that makes the difference between, for 
example, a forest at the equator and on e at higher l atitude.   LSAT  921 
 A fourth and most plausible hypothesis focuses on regional speciation, and in particular on 
rates of speciation and extinction. According to this hypothesis, if speciation rates become 
higher toward the tropics, and are not negated by extinction r ates, then the latitudinal gradient 
would result and become increasingly steep.  
The mechanism for this rate -of-speciation hypothesis is that most new animal species, and 
perhaps plant species, arise because a population subgroup becomes isolated. This subg roup 
evolves differently and eventually cannot interbreed with members of the original population. 
The uneven spread of a species over a large geographic area promotes this mechanism: at the 
edges, small populations spread out and form isolated groups. Sin ce subgroups in an arctic 
environment are more likely to face extinction than those in the tropics, the latter are more 
likely to survive long enough to adapt to local conditions and ultimately become new species.  
15. Which one of the following most accura tely expressed the main idea of the 
passage?  
(A) At present, no single hypothesis explaining the latitudinal gradient in numbers 
of species is more widely accepted than any other.  
(B) The tropical climate is more conductive to promoting species diversity t han 
are arctic or temperate climates.  
(C) Several explanations have been suggested for global patterns in species 
distribution, but a hypothesis involving rates of speciation seems most 
promising.  
(D) Despite their differences, the various hypotheses regar ding a latitudinal 
gradient in species diversity concur in prediction that the gradient can be 
expected to increase.  
(E) In distinguishing among the current hypotheses for distribution of species, the 
most important criterion is whether a hypothesis pro poses a mechanism that 
can be tested and validated.  
16. Which one of the following situations is most consistent with the species -energy 
hypothesis as described in the passage?  
(A) The many plants in a large agricultural tract represent a limited range of 
species.  
(B) An animal species experiences a death rate almost as rapid as its rate of 
growth and reproduction.  
(C) Within the small number of living organisms in a desert habitat, many 
different species are represented.  
(D) In a tropical rain forest, a sp ecies with a large population is found to exhibit 
instances of local extinction.  
(E) In an arctic tundra, the plants and animals exhibit a slow rate of growth and 
reproduction.  
17. As presented in the passage, the principles of the time theory most stro ngly 
support which one of the following predictions?  922 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (A) In the absence of additional ice ages, the number of species at high latitudes 
could eventually increase significantly.  
(B) No future ice ages are likely to change the climatic conditions that curren tly 
characterize temperate regions.  
(C) If no further ice ages occur, climatic conditions at high latitudes might 
eventually resemble those at todays tropical latitudes.  
(D) Researchers will continue to find many more new species in the tropics than 
in the arctic and temperate zones.  
(E) Future ice ages are likely to interrupt the climatic conditions that now 
characterize high -latitude regions.  
18. Which one of the following, if true, most clearly weakens the rate -of-speciation 
hypothesis as it is descr ibed in the passage?  
(A) A remote subgroup of a tropical species is reunited with the original 
population and proves unable to interbreed with members of this original 
population.  
(B) Investigation of a small area of a tropical rain forest reveals that man y 
competing species are able to coexist on the same range of resources.  
(C) A correlation between higher energy influx, larger populations and lower 
probability of local extinction is definitively established.  
(D) Researchers find more undiscovered species  during an investigation of an 
arctic region than they had anticipated.  
(E) Most of the isolated subgroups of mammalian life within a tropical zone are 
found to experience rapid extinction.  
19. Which one of the following inferences about the biological characteristics of a 
temperate -zone grassland is most strongly supported by the passage?  
(A) It has more different species than does a tropical -zone forest.  
(B) Its climatic conditions have been severely interrupted in the past by 
succession of ice ages.  
(C) If it has a large amount of biomass, it also has a large number of different 
species.  
(D) It has a larger regional pool of species than does an arctic grassland.  
(E) If population groups become isolated at its edges, they are likely to adapt to 
local  conditions  and become new species.  
20. With which one of the following statements concerning possible explanations for 
the latitudinal gradient in number of species would the author be most likely to 
agree?  
(A) The time theory is the least plausible of pr oposed hypotheses, since it does 
not correctly assess the impact of ice ages upon tropical conditions.  
(B) The rate -of-speciation hypothesis addresses a principal objection to the 
climatic -stability hypothesis.   LSAT  923 
 (C) The major objection to the time theory is  that it does not accurately reflect the 
degree to which the latitudinal gradient exists, especially when undiscovered 
species are taken into account.  
(D) Despite the claims of the species -energy hypothesis , a high rate of biological 
growth and reproductio n is more likely to exist with low biomass than with 
high biomass.  
(E) An important advantage of the rate -of-speciation theory is that it considers 
species competition in a regional rather than local context.  
Two impressive studies have reexamined Eric Williams conclusion that Britain s abolition of 
the slave trade in 1807 and its emancipation of slavers in its colonies in 1834 were driven 
primarily by economic rather than humanitarian motives. Blighted by depleted soil, 
indebtedness, and the inefficien cy of coerced labor, these colonies, according to Williams, had 
by 1807 become an impediment to British economic progress.  
Seymour Drescher provides a more balanced view. Rejecting interpretations based either 
on economic interest or the moral vision of ab olitionists, Drescher has reconstructed the 
populist  characteristics of British abolitionism, which appears to have cut across lines of class, 
party, and religion. Noting that between  1780 a nd 1830 antislavery petitions outnumbered 
those on any other issue, including parliamentary reform, Drescher concludes that such support 
cannot be explained by economic interest alone, especially when much of it came from the 
unenfranchised masses. Yet, aside from  demonstrating that such support must have resulted at 
least in part from widespread literacy and a tradition of political activism, Drescher does not 
finally explain how England, a nation deeply divided by class struggles,  could mobilize popular 
support for antislavery measures proposed by otherwise conservative politicians in the House 
of Lords  and approved the re with little dissent.  
David Eltis answer to that question actually supports som e of Williams insights. Eschewing 
Drescher s idealization of British traditions of liberty, Eltis points to continuing use of low wages 
and Draconian vagrancy laws in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries to ensure the 
industriousness of British worke rs. Indeed, certain notables  even called for the enslavement of 
unemployed laborers who roamed the British countryside an accep tance of coerced labor that 
Eltis attributes to a preindustrial desire to keep labor costs low and exports competitive. By the 
late eighteenth century, however, a growing home market  began to alert capitalists to the 
importance of want  creation and to incentives such as higher wages as a means of increasing 
both worker productivity and the number of consumers.  
Significantly, it was products grown by slaves, such as sugar, coffee, and tobacco, that 
stimulated new wants at all levels of British society and were the forerunners of products 
intended in modern capitalist societies to satisfy what Eltis describes as nonsubsistence or 
psychological needs . Eltis concludes that in economy that had begun to rely on voluntary labor 
to satisfy su ch needs, forced labor necessarily began to appear both inappropriate and 
counterproductive to employers. Eltis thus concludes that, while Williams may well have 
underestimated the economic viability of the British colonies employing force d labor in the ea rly 
1800s, his insight into the economic motives for abolition was partly accurate. British leaders 
became committed to colonial labor reform only when they became convinced, for reasons 
other than those cited by Williams, that free labor was more benefici al to the imperial economy.  924 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 21. Which one of the following best describes the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Although they disagree about the degree to which economic motives 
influenced Britains abolition of slavery, Drescher and Eltis both conc ede 
that moral persuasion by abolitionists was a significant factor.  
(B) Although both Drescher and Eltis have questioned Williams  analysis of the 
motivation behind Britains abolition of slavery, there is support for part of 
Williams  conclusion . 
(C) Bec ause he has taken into account the populist characteristics of British 
abolitionism, Dreschers explanation of what motivated Britains abolition of 
slavery is finally more persuasive than that of Eltis.  
(D) Neither Eltis nor Drescher has succeeded in expl aining why support for 
Britains abolition of slavery appears to have cut across lines of party, class, 
and religion.  
(E) Although flawed in certain respects, Williams s conclusions regarding the 
economic condition of British slave colonies early in the  nineteenth century 
have been largely vindicated . 
22. It can be inferred that Eltis cites the views of certain notables (line 35) in order 
to 
(A) support the claim that British traditions of liberty were not as strong as 
Drescher believed them to be  
(B) support the contention that a strong labor force was important to Britains 
economy  
(C) emphasize the importance of slavery as an institution in preindustrial Britain  
(D) indicate that the laboring classes provided little support for the abolition of 
slave ry 
(E) establish that laborers in preindustrial Britain had few civil rights  
23. Which on e of the following best states Williams  view of the primary reason for 
Britains abolition of the slave trade and the emancipation of slaves in its 
colonies?  
(A) B ritish populism appealed to people of varied classes, parties, and religions . 
(B) Both capitalists and workers in Britain accepted the moral precepts of 
abolitionists . 
(C) Forced labor in the colonies could not produce enough goods to satisfy 
British consu mers . 
(D) The operation of colonies based on forced labor was no longer economically 
advantageous.  
(E) British workers became convinced that forced labor in the colonies prevented 
paid workers from receiving higher wages.  
24. According to Eltis, low wag es and Draconian vagrancy laws in Britain in the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were intended to   LSAT  925 
 (A) protect laborers against unscrupulous employment practices  
(B) counter the move to enslave unemployed laborers  
(C) ensure a cheap and productive work  force  
(D) ensure that the work force experienced no unemployment  
(E) ensure that products produced in British colonies employing forced labor 
could compete effectively with those produced in Britain  
25. It can be inferred that the author of the passage  views Dreschers presentation of 
British traditions concerning liberty as  
(A) accurately stated  
(B) somewhat unrealistic  
(C) carefully researched  
(D) unnecessarily tentative  
(E) superficially convincing  
26. The information in the passage suggests that Eltis and Drescher agree that  
(A) people of all classes in Britain supported the abolition of slavery  
(B) the motives behind Britains abolition of slavery were primarily economic  
(C) the moral vision of abolitionists played a vital part in Britains aboli tion of 
slavery  
(D) British traditions of liberty have been idealized by historians  
(E) Britains tradition of political activism was primarily responsible for Britains 
abolition of slavery  
27. According to the passage, Eltis argues against which one o f the following 
contentions?  
(A) Popular support for antislavery measures existed in Britain in the early 
nineteenth century . 
(B) In the early nineteenth century, colonies that employed forced labor were still 
economically viable.  
(C) British views concerning personal liberty motivated nineteenth -century 
British opposition to slavery . 
(D) Widespread literacy in Britain contributed to public opposition to slavery in 
the early nineteenth century . 
(E) Antislavery measures proposed by conservative politicians in the earl y 
nineteenth century met with little opposition.  
LSAT   24    SECTION  II 
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 926 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on yo ur answer sheet.  
 
The career of trumpeter Miles Davis was one of the most astonishingly productive that jazz 
music has ever seen. Yet his genius has never received its due . The impatience and artistic 
restlessness that characterized his work spawned one stylistic turn after another  and made 
Davis anathema to many critics, who deplored his abandonment first of bebop and then of 
cool  acoustic jazz for ever more innovative sounds.  
Having begun his career studying bebop, Davis pulled  the first of many stylistic surprises 
when, in 1948, he became a member of an impromptu musical think tank  that gathered in a 
New York City apartment. The work of this group not only  slowed down tempos and featured 
ensemble playing as much as or even more than solos in direct reaction to bebop it also 
became the seedbed for the West Coast cool jazz style.  
In what would become a characteristic zigzag,  Davis didn t follow up  on these innovations 
himself. Instead, in the late 1950s he formed a new band that broke free from jazzs restrictive 
pattern of chord changes. Soloists could determine the shapes of their melodies witho ut 
referring back to the same unvarying repetition of chords. In this period, Davis attempted to 
join jazz phrasings , harmonies, and tonal qualities with a unified and integrated s ound similar to 
that of a classical orchestral piece: in his recordings the rhythms, no matter how jazzlike, are 
always understated, and the instrumental voicings seem muted.  
Daviss recordings from the late 1960s signal that, once again, his direction was  changing. 
On Filles de Kilimanjaro , Daviss request that keyboardist Herbie Hancock play electric rather 
than acoustic piano caused consternation among jazz purists of the time . Other albums 
featured rock -style beats, heavily e lectronic instrumentation, a loose improvisational attack and 
a growing use of studio editing to create jagged soundscapes. By 1969 Daviss typical studio 
procedure was to have musicians improvise from a base script of material and then to build 
finished p ieces out of tape, like a movie director. Rock groups had pioneered the process; to 
jazz lovers, raised on the ideal of live improvisation, that approach was a violation of the 
premise that recordings should simply document the musicians thought processes  in real time. 
Davis again became the target of fierce polemics by purist jazz critics, who have continued to 
belittle his contributions to jazz.  
What probably underlies the intensity of the reactions against Davis is fear of the 
broadening of possibilitie s that he exemplified. Ironically, he was simply doing what jazz 
explorers have always done: reaching for something new that was his own. But because  his 
career endured, because  he didnt die young or record only sporadically, and because  he 
refused to dwe ll in whatever niche he had previously carved out , critics find it difficult to 
definitively rank Davis in the aesthetic hierarchy to which they cling.  
1. Which one of the following best states the main point the passage?  
(A) Because the career of Miles Davis was characterized by frequent shifts in 
styles, he never fulfilled his musical potential.  
(B) Because the career of Miles Davis does not fit neatly into their 
preconceptions about the life and music of jazz musicians, jazz critics  have  LSAT  927 
 not accorded him the appreciation he deserves.  
(C) Because the career of Miles Davis was unusually long and productive, he 
never received the popular acclaim generally reserved for artists with more 
tragic life histories.  
(D) The long and productive career of Miles Davis spawned most of the major 
stylistic changes affecting twentieth -century jazz.  
(E) Miles Davis versatility and openness have inspired the admiration of most 
jazz critics.  
2. According to the passage, which one of the following true  of the West Coast 
cool jazz style?  
(A) It was popularized by Miles Davis.  
(B) It was characterized by a unified and integrated sound.  
(C) It was played primarily by large ensembles.  
(D) It introduced a wide variety of chord change patterns.  
(E) It gr ew out of innovations developed in New York City.  
3. The passage suggests which one of the following about the kind of jazz played by 
Miles Davis prior to 1948?  
(A) It was characterized by rapid tempos and an emphasis on solo playing.  
(B) It equally balanc ed ensemble and solo playing.  
(C) It was a reaction against more restrictive jazz styles.  
(D) It is regarded by purist jazz critics as the only authentic jazz style.  
(E) It was played primarily in New York City jazz clubs.  
4. Which one of the following best describes the author s attitude toward Miles 
Davis music?  
(A) uneasy ambivalence  
(B) cautious neutrality  
(C) grudging respect  
(D) moderate commendation  
(E) appreciative advocacy  
5. Which one of the following creative processes is most similar to M iles Davis 
typical studio procedure of the late 1960s, as described in the fourth paragraph of 
the passage?  
(A) The producer of a television comedy show suggests a setting and general 
topic for a comedy sketch and then lets the comedians write their own s cript.  
(B) An actor digresses from the written script and improvises during a monologue 
in order to introduce a feeling of spontaneity to the performance.  
(C) A conductor rehearses each section of the orchestra separately before 
assembling them to rehearse  the entire piece together.  928 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (D) An artist has several photographers take pictures pertaining to a certain 
assigned theme and then assembles them into a pictorial collage . 
(E) A teacher has each student in a writing class write an essay on an assigned 
topic and then submits the best essays to be considered for publication in a 
journal.  
6. Which one of the following, if true, would most undermine the authors 
explanation for the way Miles Davis is regarded by jazz critics?  
(A) Many jazz musicians who speci alize in improvisational playing are greatly 
admired by jazz critics.  
(B) Many jazz musicians whose careers have been characterized by several 
radical changes in style are greatly admired by jazz critics.  
(C) Several jazz musicians who perform exclusively on electronic instruments are 
very highly regarded by jazz critics.  
(D) The jazz innovators who are held in the highest regard by jazz critics had 
brief yet brilliant careers.  
(E) Jazz critics are known to have a higher regard for musicality  than for me re 
technical virtuosity.  
By the mid -fourteenth century, professional associations of canon lawyers (legal advocates  
in Christian ecclesiastical courts, which dealt with cases involving marriage, inheritance, and 
other issues) had a ppeared in most of Western Europe, and a body of professional standards 
had been defined for them. One might expect that the professional associations would play a 
prominent role in enforcing these standards of conduct, as other guilds often did, and as 
modern professional associations do, but that seems not to have happened. Advocates  
professional organizations showed little fervor for disciplining their erring members. Some even 
attempted to hobble  efforts at enforcement. The Florentine guild of lawyers, for example, 
forbade its members to play any role in disciplinary proceedings against other guild members. 
In the few recorded episodes of disciplinary enforcement, the initiative for disciplinary action 
apparently came from a dissatisfie d client, not from fellow lawyers.  
At first glance, there seem to be two possible explanations for the rarity of disciplinary 
proceedings. Medieval canon lawyers may have generally observed the standards of 
professional conduct scrupulously. Alternatively,  it is possible that deviations from the 
established standards of behavior were not uncommon, but that canonical disciplinary 
mechanisms were so inefficient that most delinquents escaped detection and punishment.  
Two considerations make it clear that the s econd of these explanations is more plausible. 
First, the English civil law  courts, whose ethical standards were similar to those of ecclesiastical 
courts, show many more examples of disciplinary actions against legal practitioners than d o the 
records of church courts. This discrepancy could well indicate that the disciplinary mechanisms 
of the civil courts functioned more efficiently than those of the church courts. The alternative 
inference, namely, that ecclesiastical advocates were les s prone to ethical lapses than their 
counterparts in the civil courts, seems inherently weak, especially since there was some overlap 
of personnel between the civil bar and the ecclesiastical  bar. 
Secon d, church authorities themselves complained about the failure of advocates to  LSAT  929 
 measure up to  ethical standards and deplored the shortcomings of the disciplinary system. 
Thus the Council of Basel declared that canon lawyers fai led to adhere to the ethical 
prescriptions laid down in numerous papal  constitutions and directed Cardinal Cesarian  to 
address the problem. In England, where medieval church records are extraordinarily rich, 
similar complaints abo ut the failure of the disciplinary system to reform  unethical practices 
were very common.  
Such criticisms seem to have had a paradoxical result, for they apparentl y reinforced the 
professional solidarity of lawyers at the expense of the enforcement of ethical standards. Thus 
the profession s critics may actually have induced advocates to organize professional 
associations for self -defense. The critics  attacks may a lso have persuaded lawyers to assign a 
higher priority to defending themselves against attacks by nonprofessionals than to disciplining 
wayward  members within their own ranks.  
7. Which one of the following best states the main conclusion  of the passage?  
(A) Professional organizations of medieval canon lawyers probably only enforced 
ethical standards among their own members when provoked to do so by 
outside criticisms.  
(B) Professional organizations of medieval civil lawyers seem to have m aintained 
stricter ethical standards for their own members than did professional 
organizations of medieval canon lawyers.  
(C) Professional organizations of medieval canon lawyers apparently served to 
defend their members against critics attacks rather tha n to enforce ethical 
standards.  
(D) The ethical standards maintained by professional associations of medieval 
canon lawyers were chiefly laid down in papal constitutions.  
(E) Ethical standards for medieval canon lawyers were not laid down until 
professi onal organizations for these lawyers had been formed.  
8. According to the passage, which one of the following statements about law courts 
in medieval England is true?  
(A) Some English lawyers who practiced in civil courts also practiced in church 
courts, b ut others served exclusively in one court or the other.  
(B) English canon lawyers were more likely to initiate disciplinary proceedings 
against their colleagues than were English civil lawyers.  
(C) English civil lawyers maintained more stringent ethical st andards than did 
civil lawyers in the rest of Europe.  
(D) English ecclesiastical courts had originally been modeled upon English civil 
courts.  
(E) English ecclesiastical courts kept richer and more thorough records than did 
English civil courts.  
9. The author refers to the Florentine guild of lawyers in the first paragraph most 
probably in order to  930 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (A) introduce a theory about to be promoted  
(B) illustrate the type of action referred to in the previous sentence  
(C) underline the universality of a method discussed throughout the paragraph  
(D) point out a flaw in an argument presented earlier in the paragraph  
(E) rebut an anticipated objection to a thesis just proposed  
10. The author refers to the Council of Basel (line 47) primarily in order to  
(A) prov ide an example of the type of action needed to establish professional 
standards for canon lawyers  
(B) contrast the reactions of English church authorities with the reactions of other 
bodies to violations of professional standards by canon lawyers  
(C) bolst er the argument that violations of professional standards by canon 
lawyers did take place  
(D) explain how rules of conduct for canon lawyers were established  
(E) describe the development of a disciplinary system to enforce professional 
standards among c anon lawyers  
11. According to the information in the passage, for which one of the following 
ethical violations would documentation of disciplinary action against a canon 
lawyer be most likely to exist?  
(A) betraying a clients secrets to the opposing part y 
(B) bribing the judge to rule in favor of a client  
(C) misrepresenting credentials  in order to gain admission to the lawyers guild  
(D) spreading rumors in order to discredit an opposing lawyer  
(E) knowingly helping a client to misrepresent the truth  
12. Which one of the following is most analogous to the professional solidarity 
referred to in lines 56 -57? 
(A) Members of a teachers union go on strike when they believe one of their 
colleagues to be falsely accused of using an inappropriate textbook.  
(B) In order to protect the reputation of the press in the face of a largely hostile 
public, a journalist conceals distortions in a colleagues news article.  
(C) Several dozen recording artists agree to participate in a concert to benefit an 
endangered env ironmental habitat.  
(D) In order to expedite governmental approval of a drug, a government official is 
persuaded to look the other way when a pharmaceutical manufacturer 
conceals evidence that the drug may have minor side effects.  
(E) A popular politici an agrees to campaign for another, less popular politician 
belonging to the same political party.  
13. The passage suggests that which one of the following is most likely to have been 
true of medieval guilds?   LSAT  931 
 (A) Few guilds of any importance existed before the mid -fourteenth century.  
(B) Many medieval guilds exercised influence over the actions of their members.  
(C) Most medieval guilds maintained more exacting ethical standards than did the 
associations of canon lawyers.  
(D) Medieval guilds found it difficu lt to enforce discipline among their members.  
(E) The ethical standards of medieval guilds varied from one city to another.  
14. The author would be most likely to agree with which one of the following 
regarding the hypothesis that medieval canon lawyers  observed standards of 
professional conduct scrupulously?  
(A) It is untrue because it is contradicted by documents obtained from the 
ecclesiastical courts.  
(B) It is unlikely because it describes behavior markedly different from behavior 
observed in the  same situation in modern society.  
(C) It is unlikely because it describes behavior markedly different from behavior 
observed in a similar area of medieval society.  
(D) It is impossible to assess intelligently because of the dearth  of civil and 
ecclesiasti cal documents.  
(E) It is directly supported by documents obtained from civil and ecclesiastical 
courts.  
Many birds that form flocks compete through aggressive interaction  for priority of access to 
resources suc h as food and shelter. The result of repeated interactions between flock members 
is that each bird gains a particular social status related to its fighting ability, with priority of 
access to resources increasing with higher status. As the number and inten sity of interactions 
between birds increase, however, so increase the costs to each bird in terms of energy 
expenditure, time, and risk of injury. Thus, birds possessing attributes that reduce the number 
of costly interactions in which they must be involve d, without leading to a reduction in status, 
are at an advantage . An external signal , such as a plumage type, announcing fighting ability 
and thereby obviating the actual need to fight, could be one such at tribute.  
The zoologist Rohwer asserted that plumage variations in  Harris sparrows support the 
status signaling hypothesis (SSH). He reported that almost without exception birds with darker 
throats win conflicts with individuals having lighter plumage. He  claimed that even among birds 
of the same age and sex the amount of dark plumage predicts relative dominance status.  
However, Rohwers data do not support his assertions: in one of his studies darker birds 
won only 57 out of 75 conflicts; within another, focusing on conflicts between birds of the same 
age group or sex, darker birds won 63 and lost 62. There are indications that plumage probably 
does signal broad age -related differences in status among Harris sparrows: adults, usually dark 
throated, have hi gher status than juveniles, who are usually light throated; moreover, juveniles 
dyed to resemble adults are dominant over undyed juveniles. However, the Harris sparrows 
age-related plumage differences do not signal the status of individual birds within an  age class, 
and thus cannot properly be included under the term status signaling . 
The best evidence for status signaling is from the greater titmouse. Experiments show a 932 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 strong correlation between the width of the black breast -plumage stripe and status a s 
measured by success in aggressive interactions. An analysis of factors likely to be associated 
with breast -stripe width (sex, age, wing length, body weight) has demonstrated social status to 
be the only variable that correlates with stripe width when the  other variables are held 
constant.  
An ingenious experiment provided further evidence for status signaling in the greater 
titmouse. One of three stuffed titmouse dummies was mounted on a feeding tray. When a live 
bird approached, the dummy was turned by ra dio control to face the bird and present its breast 
stripe in display. When presented with a dummy having a narrower breast stripe than their 
own, birds approached closely and behaved aggressively. However, when presented with a 
dummy having a broader br east stripe than their own, live birds acted submissive and did not 
approach.  
15. According to the passage, the status signaling hypothesis holds that the ability to 
display a recognizable external signal would have the effect on an individual bird 
of 
(A) enabling it to attract a mate of high status  
(B) allowing it to avoid costly aggressive interactions  
(C) decreasing its access to limited resources  
(D) making it less attractive to predatory species  
(E) increasing its fighting ability  
16. The author ref ers to the fact that adult Harris sparrows are usually dark throated 
(lines 31 -32), in order to do which one of the following?  
(A) support the conclusion that plumage variation among Harris sparrows 
probably does not signal individual status  
(B) argue that  plumage variation among Harris sparrows helps to confirm the 
status signaling hypothesis  
(C) indicate that in light of plumage variation patterns among Harris sparrows, 
the status signaling hypothesis should probably be modified  
(D) demonstrate that Harri s sparrows are the most appropriate subjects for the 
study of status signaling among birds  
(E) suggest that the signaling of age -related differences in status is widespread 
among birds that form flocks  
17. Which one of the following, if true, would most  seriously undermine the validity 
of the results of the experiment discussed in the last paragraph?  
(A) The live birds all came from different titmouse flocks.  
(B) The physical characteristics of the stuffed dummies varied in ways other than 
just breast -stripe width.  
(C) No live juvenile birds were included in the experiment.  
(D) The food placed in the feeding tray was not the kind of food normally eaten 
by titmice in the wild.   LSAT  933 
 (E) Even the live birds that acted aggressively did not actually physically a ttack 
the stuffed dummies.  
18. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A hypothesis is introduced and studies relevant to the hypothesis are 
discussed and evaluated.  
(B) A natural phenomenon is presented and several e xplanations for the 
phenomenon are examined in detail.  
(C) Behavior is described, possible underlying causes for the behavior are 
reported, and the likelihood of each cause is assessed.  
(D) A scientific conundrum  is explained and the history of the issue i s recounted.  
(E) A scientific theory is outlined and opinions for and against its validity as well 
as experiments supporting each side are compared.  
19. According to the passage, which one of the following true of Rohwers 
relationship to the status sig naling hypothesis (SSH)?  
(A) Although his research was designed to test the SSH, his data proved to be 
more relevant to other issues.  
(B) He set out to confirm the SSH, but ended up revising it.  
(C) He set out to disprove the SSH, but ended up accepting it . 
(D) He altered the SSH by expanding it to encompass various types of signals.  
(E) He advocated the SSH, but his research data failed to confirm it.  
20. The passage suggests that among birds that form flocks, a bird of high status is 
most likely to hav e which one of the following?  
(A) dark throat plumage  
(B) greater -than-average body weight  
(C) offspring of high status  
(D) strong fighting ability  
(E) frequent injuries  
21. Which one of the following can be inferred about Harris sparrows from the 
passa ge? 
(A) Among Harris sparrows, plumage differences signal individual status only 
within age groups.  
(B) Among Harris sparrows, adults have priority of access to food over juveniles.  
(C) Among Harris sparrows, juveniles with relatively dark plumage have sta tus 
equal to that of adults with relatively light plumage.  
(D) Juvenile Harris sparrows engage in aggressive interaction more frequently 
than do adult Harris sparrows.  
(E) Harris sparrows engage in aggressive interaction less frequently than do 
greater titmice . 934 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 In The Dynamics of Apocalypse , John Lowe attempts to solve the mystery of the collapse 
of the Classic Mayan civilization. Lowe bases his study on a detailed examination of the known 
archaeological record. Like previous investigators, Lowe relies o n dated monuments to 
construct a step -by-step account of the actual collapse. Using the erection of new monuments 
as a means to determine a sites occupation span, Lowe assumes that once new monuments 
ceased to be built, a site had been abandoned. Lowes a nalysis of the evidence suggests that 
construction of new monuments continued to increase between A.  D. 672 and 751 , but that the 
civilization stopped expanding geographically ; new construction took place almost exclusively 
in established settlements. The first signs of trouble followed. Monument inscriptions indicate 
that between 751 and 790, long -standing alliances started to break down. Evidence also 
indicates that between 790 and 830, the death rate in Classic Mayan cities outstripped the 
birthrate. Aft er approximately 830, construction stopped throughout the area, and within a 
hundred years, the Classic Mayan civilization all but  vanished.  
Having established this chronology, Lowe sets forth  a plausible explanation of the collapse 
that accommodates  the available archaeological evidence. He theorizes that Classic Mayan 
civilization was brought down  by the interactio n of several factors, set in motion  by population 
growth. An increase in population, particularly within the elite segment of society, necessitated 
ever more intense far ming. Agricultural intensification exerted stress on the soil and led to a 
decline in productivity (the amount of food produced through each unit of labor invested). At 
the same time, the growth of the elite class created increasing demands for ceremonial 
monuments and luxuries, diverting needed labor from the fields. The theory holds that these 
stresses were communicated and amplified throughout the area as Mayan states engaged in 
warfare to acquire laborers and food, and refugees fled impoverished areas. The most 
vulnerable states thus began to break down , and each downfall triggered others, until the 
entire civilization collapsed.  
If there is a central flaw in Lowes explanation, it is that the entire edifice rests on the 
assumption that the available evi dence paints a true picture of how the collapse proceeded. 
However, it is difficult to know how accurately the archaeological record reflects historic activity, 
especially of a complex civilization such as the Mayans , and a hypothesis can be tested only 
against the best available data. It is quite possible that our understanding of the collapse might 
be radically altered by better data. For example, Lowes assumption about monument 
construction and the occupation span of a site might well be disproved if f urther investigations 
of Classic Mayan sites established that some remained heavily settled long after the custom of 
carving dynastic monuments had ceased.  
22. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the passage?  
(A) A method used to analyze evidence is described, an explanation of the 
evidence is suggested, and then a conclusion is drawn from the evidence.  
(B) A hypothesis is presented, evidence supporting the hypothesis is provided, 
and then the hypothesis is affirmed.  
(C) An analysi s of a study is presented, contradictory evidence is examined, and 
then a direction for future studies is suggested.  
(D) The basis of a study is described, a theory that explains the available evidence 
is presented, and a possible flaw in the study is poin ted out.   LSAT  935 
 (E) An observation is made, evidence supporting the observation is presented, and 
then contradictions in the evidence are discussed.  
23. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) In The Dynamics of Apocalypse , John Lowe successfully proves that the 
collapse of Classic Mayan civilization was set in motion by increasing 
population and decreasing productivity.  
(B) In The Dynamics of Apocalypse , John Lowe breaks new ground in solving the 
mystery of the collapse of C lassic Mayan civilization through his use of 
dated monuments to create a step -by-step account of the collapse.  
(C) In The Dynamics of Apocalypse , John Lowe successfully uses existing data to 
document the reduction and then cessation of new construction thr oughout 
Classic Mayan civilization.  
(D) Although John Lowe s study is based on a careful examination of the 
historical record, it does not accurately reflect the circumstances surrounding 
the collapse of Classic Mayan civilization.  
(E) While John Lowe s theory about the collapse of Classic Mayan civilization 
appears credible, it is based on an assumption that cannot be verified using 
the archaeological record.  
24. Which one of the following is most closely analogous to the assumption Lowe 
makes about the  relationship between monument construction and Classic Mayan 
cities? 
(A) A person assumes that the shortage of fresh produce on the shelves of a 
grocery store is due to t he effects of poor weather conditions during the 
growing season.  
(B) A person assumes that a movie theater only shows foreign films because the 
titles of the films shown there are not familiar to the person.  
(C) A  person assumes that a restaurant is under new ownership because the 
restaurant s menu has changed drastically since the last time the person ate 
there.  
(D) A person assumes that a corporation has been sold because there is a new 
name for the corporation on the sign outside the building where the c ompany 
is located.  
(E) A person assumes a friend has sold her stamp collection because the friend 
has stopped purchasing new stamps.  
25. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would describe the method 
Lowe used to construct a step -by-step chronology of the actual collapse of 
Classic Mayan civilization as  
(A) daringly innovative but flawed  
(B) generally accepted but questionable  
(C) very reliable but outdated  936 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (D) unscientific but effective  
(E) unconventional but brilliant  
26. The author o f the passage would most likely agree with which one of the 
following statements about the use of the archaeological record to reconstruct 
historic activity?  
(A) With careful analysis, archaeological evidence can be used to reconstruct 
accurately the historic activity of a past civilization.  
(B) Archaeological evidence is more useful for reconstructing the day -to-day 
activities of a culture than its long -term trends.  
(C) The accuracy of the archaeological record for reconstructing historic activity 
is dependent on the duration of the particular civilization.  
(D) The archaeological record is not an appropriate source of data for 
reconstructing historic activity.  
(E) Historic activity can be reconstructed from archaeological evidence, but it is 
ultimat ely impossible to confirm the accuracy of the reconstruction.  
LSAT   25    SECTION I  
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the p assage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding  space on your answer sheet.  
Painter Frida Kahlo (1910 -1954) often used harrowing  images derived from her Mexican 
heritage to express suffering caused by a disabling accident and a stormy  marriage. Suggesting 
much personal and emotional content, her works many of them self -portraits have been 
exhaustively psychoanalyzed , while their political content has been less studied. Yet Kahlo was 
an ardent political activist who in her art sought not only to explore her own  roots, but also to 
champion  Mexicos struggle for an independent political and cultural identity . 
Kahlo was influenced by Marxism, which appealed to many intellectuals in the 1920s and 
1930s, and by Mexican nationalism. Interest in Mexico s culture and history had revived in the 
nineteenth century, and by the early 1900s, Mexican indigenista  tendencies ranged from a 
violently anti -Spanish i dealization of Aztec Mexico to an emphasis on contemporary Mexican 
Indians as the key to authentic Mexican culture . Mexican nationalism, reacting against 
contemporary United States political intervention in labor disputes as well as against past 
domination  by Spain, identified the Aztecs as the last independent rulers of an indigenous 
political unit. Kahlos form of Mexicanidad , a romantic nationalism that focused upon traditional 
art uniting all indigenistas , revered the Aztecs as a powerful pre -Columbian society that had 
united a large area of the Middle Americas and that was thought to have been based on 
communal labor, the Marxist ideal.  
In her paintings, Kahlo repeatedly employed Aztec  symbols, such as skeletons or bleeding 
hearts that were traditionally related to the emanation of life from death and light from  LSAT  937 
 darkness. These images of destruction  coupled with  creation  speak  not only to Kahlos personal 
battle for life, but also to the Mexican struggle to emerge as a nation by implication , to 
emerge with the political and cul tural strength admired in the Aztec civilization. Self-portrait on 
the Border between Mexico and the United States  (1932), for example, shows Kahlo wearing a 
bone necklace, holding a Mexican flag, and standing between a highly industrialized United 
States and an agricultural, preindustrial Mexico. On the United States side are mechanistic  and 
modern images such as smokestacks , light bulbs, and robots. In contrast, the organic and 
ancient symbols on the Mexican side a blood -drenched Sun, lush ve getation, an Aztec 
sculpture, a pre -Columbian temple, and a skull alluding to those that lined the walls of Aztec 
temples emphasize the interrelation of life, death, the earth, and the cosmos.  
Kahlo portrayed Aztec images in the folkloric style of traditio nal Mexican paintings, thereby 
heightening the clash between modern materialism and indigenous tradition; similarly, she 
favored planned economic development, but not at the expense of cultural identity. Her use of 
familiar symbols in a readily accessible style also served her goal of being popularly understood; 
in turn , Kahlo is viewed by some Mexicans as a mythic figure representative of nationalism 
itself.  
1. Which one of the following best expresses the main  point of the passage?  
(A) The doctrines of Marxist ideology and Mexican nationalism heavily 
influenced Mexican painters of Kahlos generation.  
(B) Kahlos paintings contain numerous references to the Aztecs as an indigenous 
Mexican people predating Europe an influence.  
(C) An important element of Kahlos work is conveyed by symbols that reflect 
her advocacy of indigenous Mexican culture and Mexican political 
autonomy.  
(D) The use of Aztec images and symbols in Kahlos art can be traced to the late 
nineteent h-century revival of interest in Mexican history and culture.  
(E) Kahlo used Aztec imagery in her paintings primarily in order to foster 
contemporary appreciation for the authentic art of traditional Mexican 
culture.  
2. With which one of the following s tatements concerning psychoanalytic and 
political interpretations of Kahlos work would the author be most likely to 
agree?  
(A) The psychoanalytic interpretations of Kahlos work tend to challenge the 
political interpretations.  
(B) Political and psychoanal ytic interpretations are complementary approaches to 
Kahlos work.  
(C) Recent political interpretations of Kahlos work are causing psychoanalytic 
critics to revise their own interpretations.  
(D) Unlike the political interpretations, the psychoanalytic int erpretations make 
use of biographical facts of Kahlos life.  
(E) Kahlos mythic status among the audience Kahlo most wanted to reach is 938 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 based upon the psychoanalytic rather than the political content of her work.  
3. Which one of the following stances  toward the United States does the passage 
mention as characterizing Mexican nationalists in the early twentieth century?  
(A) opposition to United States involvement in internal Mexican affairs  
(B) desire to decrease emigration of the Mexican labor force to t he United States  
(C) desire to improve Mexicos economic competitiveness with the United States  
(D) reluctance to imitate the United States model of rapid industrialization  
(E) advocacy of a government based upon that of the Marxist Soviet Union rather 
than that of the United States  
4. In the context of the passage, which one of the following phrases could best be 
substituted for the word romantic (line 24) without substantially changing the 
authors meaning?  
(A) dreamy and escapist  
(B) nostalgic and i dealistic  
(C) fanciful and imaginative  
(D) transcendental and impractical  
(E) overwrought and sentimental  
5. The passage mentions each of the following as an Aztec symbol or image found 
in Kahlos paintings EXCEPT a  
(A) skeleton  
(B) sculpture  
(C) serpen t 
(D) skull  
(E) bleeding heart  
6. Which one of the following best describes the organization of the third 
paragraph?  
(A) contrast of opposing ideas  
(B) reconciliation of conflicting concepts  
(C) interrelation of complementary themes  
(D) explication of a  principles implications  
(E) support for a generalization by means of an example  
7. The passage implies that Kahlos attitude toward the economic development of 
Mexico was  
(A) enthusiastic  
(B) condemnatory  
(C) cautious  
(D) noncommittal   LSAT  939 
 (E) uncertain  
8. The main purpose of the passage is to  
(A) critique an artists style  
(B) evaluate opposing theories  
(C) reconcile conflicting arguments  
(D) advocate an additional interpretation  
(E) reconsider an artist in light of new discoveries  
In recent years , a growing belief that the way society decides what to treat as true is 
controlled through largely unrecognized discursive  practices has led legal reformers to examine 
the complex interconnections between narrative and law. I n many legal systems, legal 
judgments are based on competing stories about events. Without having witnessed these 
events, judges and juries must validate  some stories as true and reject  others as false. This 
procedure is rooted i n objectivism , a philosophi cal approach that has supported most Western 
legal and intellectual systems for centuries. Objectivism holds that there is a single neutral 
description of each event that is unskewed by any particular point of view and that has a 
privileged position over a ll other accounts. The laws quest for truth, therefore, consists of 
locating this objective description, the one that tells what really happened , as opposed to what 
those involved thought happened . The serious flaw in objectivism is that there is no such thing 
as the neutral, objective observer. As psychologists have demonstrated, all observers bring to a 
situation a set of expectations, values, and beliefs that determine what the observers are able 
to see and hear. Two individuals listening to the same st ory will hear different things, because 
they emphasize those aspects that accord with  their learned experiences and  ignore those 
aspects that are dissonant with their view of the world. Hence there is never any escape in life 
or in law from selective perce ption or from subjective judgments based on prior experiences, 
values, and beliefs.  
The societal harm caused by the assumption of objectivist principles in traditional legal 
discourse is that, historically, the stories judged to be objectively true are tho se told by people 
who are trained in legal discourse, while the stories of those who are not fluent in the language 
of the law are rejected as false.  
Legal scholars such as Patricia Williams, Derrick Bell, and Mari Matsuda have sought 
empowerment for the l atter group of people through the construction of alternative legal 
narratives. Objectivist legal discourse systematically disallows the language of emotion and 
experience by focusing on cognition in its narrowest sense. These legal reformers propose 
replacing such abstract discourse with powerful personal stories. They argue that the absorbing, 
nonthreatening structure and tone of personal stories may convince legal insiders for the first 
time to listen to th ose not fluent in legal language. The compelling  force of personal narrative 
can create a sense of empathy between legal insiders and people traditionally excluded from 
legal discourse and, hence, from power. Such alternative narratives can shatter the 
complacency of the legal establishment and disturb its tranquility. Thus, the engaging power of 
narrative might play a crucial, positive role in the process of legal reconstruction by overcoming 
differences in background and training and forming a new collectivity based on emotional 
empathy.  940 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 9. Which one o f the following best states the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Some legal scholars have sought to empower people historically excluded 
from traditional legal discourse by instructing them in the forms of discourse 
favored by legal insiders.  
(B) Some legal s cholars have begun to realize the social harm caused by the 
adversarial atmosphere that has pervaded many legal systems for centuries.  
(C) Some legal scholars have proposed alleviating the harm caused by the 
prominence of objectivist principles within lega l discourse by replacing that 
discourse with alternative forms of legal narrative.  
(D) Some legal scholars have contended that those who feel excluded from 
objectivist legal systems would be empowered by the construction of a new 
legal language that better  reflected objectivist principles.  
(E) Some legal scholars have argued that the basic flaw inherent in objectivist 
theory can be remedied by recognizing that it is not possible to obtain a 
single neutral description of a particular event.  
10. According to the passage, which one of the following is true about the intellectual 
systems mentioned in line 11?  
(A) They have long assumed the possibility of a neutral depiction of events.  
(B) They have generally remained unskewed by particular points of view.  
(C) Their discursive practices have yet to be analyzed by legal scholars.  
(D) They accord a privileged position to the language of emotion and experience.  
(E) The accuracy of their basic tenets has been confirmed by psychologists.  
11. Which one of the foll owing best describes the sense of cognition referred to in 
line 43 of the passage?  
(A) logical thinking uninfluenced by passion  
(B) the interpretation of visual cues  
(C) human thought that encompasses all emotion and experience  
(D) the reasoning actually  employed by judges to arrive at legal judgments  
(E) sudden insights inspired by the power of personal stories  
12. It can be inferred from the passage that Williams, Bell, And Matsuda believe 
which one of the following to be central component of legal r eform?  
(A) incorporating into the law the latest developments in the fields of psychology 
and philosophy  
(B) eradicating from legal judgments discourse with a particular point of view  
(C) granting all participants in legal proceedings equal access to train ing in the 
forms and manipulation of legal discourse  
(D) making the law more responsive to the discursive practices of a wider variety 
of people  
(E) instilling an appreciation of legal history and methodology in all the  LSAT  941 
 participants in a legal proceedin g 
13. Which one of the following most accurately describes the authors attitude toward 
proposals to introduce personal stories into legal discourse?  
(A) strongly opposed  
(B) somewhat skeptical  
(C) ambivalent  
(D) strongly supportive  
(E) unreservedly opt imistic  
14. The passage suggests that Williams, Bell, and Matsuda would most likely agree 
with which one of the following statements regarding personal stories?  
(A) Personal stories are more likely to adhere to the principles of objectivism than 
are other forms of discourse.  
(B) Personal stories are more likely to de -emphasize differences in background 
and training than are traditional forms of legal discourse.  
(C) Personal stories are more likely to restore tranquility to the legal 
establishment than are m ore adversarial forms of discourse.  
(D) Personal stories are more likely to lead to the accurate reconstruction of facts 
than are traditional forms of legal narrative.  
(E) Personal stories are more likely to be influenced by a persons expectations, 
values, and beliefs than are other forms of discourse.  
15. Which one of the following statements about legal discourse in legal systems 
based on objectivism can be inferred from the passage?  
(A) In most Western societies the legal establishment controls ac cess to training 
in legal discourse.  
(B) Expertise in legal discourse affords power in most Western societies.  
(C) Legal discourse has become progressively more abstract for some centuries.  
(D) Legal discourse has traditionally denied the existence of neut ral objective 
observers.  
(E) Traditional legal discourse seeks to reconcile dissonant world views.  
16. Those who reject objectivism would regard the law s quest for truth (line 15 -16) 
as most similar to which one of the following?  
(A) a hunt for an im aginary animal  
(B) the search for a valuable mineral among worthless stones  
(C) the painstaking assembly of a jigsaw puzzle  
(D) comparing an apple with an orange  
(E) the scientific analysis of a chemical compound  
Many people complain about corporations,  but there are also those whose criticism goes 
further and who hold corporations morally to blame for many of the problems in Western 942 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 society. Their criticism is not reserved  solely for fraudulent or illegal business activities, but 
extends to the ba sic corporate practice of making decisions based on what will maximize profits 
without regard to whether such decisions will contribute to the public good. Others, mainly 
economists, have responded that this criticism is flawed because it inappropriately a pplies 
ethical principles to economic relationships.  
It is only by extension that we attribute  the quality of morality to corporations, for 
corporations are not persons. Corporate responsibility is an aggregation of the responsibilities 
of those persons em ployed by the corporation when they act in and on behalf of  the 
corporation. Some corporations are owner operated, but in many corporations and in most 
larger ones there is a syndicate of owners to whom the chief executive officer, or CEO, who 
runs the corporation is said to have a fiduciary obliga tion. 
The economists argue that a CEOs sole responsibility  is to the owners, whose primary 
interest, except in charitable institutions, is the protection of their profits. CEOs are bound, as a 
condition of their employment, to seek a profit for the owners . But suppose a noncharitable 
organization is owner operated , or, for some other reason, its CEO is not obligated to maximize 
profits. The economists  view is that even if such a CEO s purpose is to look to the public good 
and nothing else, the CEO should still work to maximize profits, because that will turn out best 
for the public anyway.  
But the economists position does not hold up  (to continue in the same condition without 
failing or losing effectiveness or force you seem to be holding up under the st rain) under 
careful scrutiny. For one thing, although there are, no doubt, strong underlying dynamics in 
national and international economies that tend to make  the pursuit of corporate interest 
contribute  to the public good, there is no guarantee either t heoretically or in practice that a 
given CEO will benefit the public by maximizing corporate profit. It is absurd to deny the 
possibility , say, of a paper mill legally maximizing its profits over a five -year period by 
decimating a forest for its wood or po lluting a lake with its industrial waste. Furthermore, while 
obligations such as those of corporate CEOs to corporate owners are binding in a business or 
legal sense, they are not morally paramount. The CEO could make a case to the owners that 
certain prof itable courses of action should not be taken because they are likely to detract  (to 
diminish the importance, value, or effectiveness of something ; often used with from ) from the 
public good. The economic consequences that may befall the CEO for doing so, s uch as penalty 
or dismissal, ultimately do not excuse  the individual from the responsibility for acting morally.  
17. Which one of the following most accurately states the main point of the passage?  
(A) Although CEOs may be legally obligated to maximize the ir corporations 
profits, this obligation does not free them from the moral responsibility of 
considering the implications of the corporations actions for the public good.  
(B) Although morality is not easily ascribed to nonhuman entities, corporations 
can be said to have an obligation to act morally in the sense that they are 
made up of individuals who must act morally.  
(C) Although economists argue that maximizing a corporations profits is likely to 
turn out best for the public, a CEOs true obligations is still to seek a profit 
for the corporations owners.   LSAT  943 
 (D) Although some people criticize corporations for making unethical decisions, 
economists argue that such criticisms are unfounded because ethical 
considerations cannot be applied to economics.  
(E) Although critics of corporations argue that CEOs ought to consider the public 
good when making financial decisions, the results of such decisions in fact 
always benefit the public.  
18. The discussion of the paper mill in lines 42 -46 is intended primarily  to 
(A) offer an actual case of unethical corporate behavior  
(B) refute the contention that maximization of profits necessarily benefits the 
public  
(C) illustrate that ethical restrictions on corporations would be difficult to enforce  
(D) demonstrate that corporations are responsible for many social ills  
(E) deny that corporations are capable of acting morally  
19. With which one of the following would the economists mentioned in the passage 
be most likely to agree?  
(A) Even CEOs of charitable organizatio ns are obligated to maximize profits.  
(B) CEOs of owner -operated noncharitable  corporations should make decisions 
based primarily on maximizing profits.  
(C) Owner -operated noncharitable corporations are less likely to be profitable 
than other corporations . 
(D) It is highly unlikely that the actions of any particular CEO will benefit the 
public.  
(E) CEOs should attempt to maximize profits unless such attempts result in harm 
to the environment.  
20. The conception of morality that underlies the authors arg ument in the passage is 
best expressed by which one of the following principles?  
(A) What makes actions morally right is their contribution to the public good.  
(B) An action is morally right if it carries the risk of personal penalty.  
(C) Actions are moral ly right if they are not fraudulent or illegal.  
(D) It is morally wrong to try to maximize ones personal benefit.  
(E) Actions are not morally wrong unless they harm others.  
21. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) illustrate a paradox  
(B) argue  for legal reform  
(C) refute a claim  
(D) explain a decision  
(E) define a concept  
What it means to explain something in science often comes down to  the application of 944 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 mathematics. Some thinkers hold that mat hematics is a kind of language a systematic 
contrivance of signs, the criteria for the authority of which  are internal coherence, elegance, 
and depth. The application of such a highly artificial system to the physical world, t hey claim, 
results in the creation of a kind of statement about the world. Accordingly, what matters in the 
sciences is finding a mathematical concept that attempts, as other language does, to accurately 
describe the functioning of some aspect of the world . 
At the center of the issue of scientific knowledge can thus be found questions about the 
relationship between language and what it refers to . A discussion about the role played by 
language in the pursuit of knowledge has been going on among linguists for  several decades. 
The debate centers around whether language corresponds in some essential way to objects 
and behaviors, making knowledge a solid and reliable commodity ; or, on the other hand,  
whether the relationship between language and things is purely a matter of agreed -upon 
conventions, making knowledge tenuous, relative, and inexact.  
Lately the latter theory has been gaining wider acceptance. According to linguists who 
support this theory , the way language is used varies depending upon changes in accepted 
practices and theories among those who work in particular discipline. These linguists argue that, 
in the pursuit of knowledge, a statement is true only when there are no promising alterna tives 
that might lead one to question it. Certainly this characterization would seem to be applicable to 
the sciences. In science, a mathematical statement may be taken to account for every aspect of 
a phenomenon it is applied to, but, some would argue, th ere is nothing inherent in 
mathematical language that guarantees such a correspondence. Under this view, acceptance of 
a mathematical statement by the scientific community by virtue of the statements predictive 
power or methodological efficiency transform s what is basically an analogy or metaphor into 
an explanation of the physical process in question, to be held as true until another, more 
compelling analogy takes its place.  
In pursuing the implications of this theory, linguists have reached the point at which they 
must ask: If words or sentences do not correspond in an essential way to life or to our ideas 
about life, then just what are they capable of telling us about the world? In science and 
mathematics, then, it would seem equally necessary to ask: If  models of electrolytes or E=mc2, 
say, do not correspond essentially to the physical world, then just what functions do they 
perform in the acquisition of scientific knowledge? But this question has yet to be significantly 
addressed in the sciences.  
22. Which one of the following statements most accurately expresses the passages 
main point?  
(A) Although scientists must rely on both language and mathematics in their 
pursuit of scientific knowledge, each is an imperfect tool for perceiving and 
interpreting a spects of the physical world.  
(B) The acquisition of scientific knowledge depends on an agreement among 
scientists to accept some mathematical statements as more precise than 
others while acknowledging that all mathematics is inexact.  
(C) If science is tru ly to progress, scientists must temporarily abandon the pursuit 
of new knowledge in favor of a systematic analysis of how the knowledge  LSAT  945 
 they already possess came to be accepted as true.  
(D) In order to better understand the acquisition of scientific knowle dge, 
scientists must investigate mathematical statements relationship to the world 
just as linguists study language s relationship to the world.  
(E) Without the debates among linguists that preceded them, it is unlikely that 
scientists would ever have begun to explore the essential role played by 
mathematics in the acquisition of scientific knowledge.  
23. Which one of the following statements, if true, lends the most support to the view 
that language has an essential correspondence to things it describe s? 
(A) The categories of physical objects employed by one language correspond 
remarkably to the categories employed by another language that developed 
independently of the first.  
(B) The categories of physical objects employed by one language correspond 
remarkably to the categories employed by another language that derives 
from the first.  
(C) The categories of physical objects employed by speakers of a language 
correspond remarkably to the categories employed by other speakers of the 
same language.  
(D) The sentence structures of languages in scientifically sophisticated societies 
vary little from language to language.  
(E) Native speakers of many languages believe that the categories of physical 
objects employed by their language correspond to natural cate gories of 
objects in the world.  
24. According to the passage, mathematics can be considered a language because it  
(A) conveys meaning in the same way that metaphors do  
(B) constitutes a systematic collection of signs  
(C) corresponds exactly to aspects of p hysical phenomena  
(D) confers explanatory power on scientific theories  
(E) relies on previously agreed -upon conventions  
25. The primary purpose of the third paragraph is to  
(A) offer support for the view of linguists who believe that language has an 
essential correspondence to things  
(B) elaborate the position of linguists who believe that truth is merely a matter of 
convention  
(C) illustrate the differences between the essentialist and conventionalist position 
in the linguists debate  
(D) demonstrate th e similarity of the linguists debate to a current debate among 
scientists about the nature of explanation  
(E) explain the theory that mathematical statements are a kind of language  946 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 26. Based on the passage, linguists who subscribes to the theory descri bed in lines 
21-24 would hold that the statement the ball is red is true because  
(A) speakers of English have accepted that the ball is red applies to the 
particular physical relationship being described  
(B) speakers of English do not accept that synon yms for ball and red express 
these concepts as elegantly  
(C) The ball is red corresponds essentially to every aspect of the particular 
physical relationship being described  
(D)  ball and red actually refer to an entity and a property respectively  
(E)  ball and red are mathematical concepts that attempt to accurately describe 
some particular physical relationship in the world  
LSAT   26    SECTION IV 
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of  questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most a ccurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
It has recently been discovered that many attributions of paintings to the 
seventeenth -century Dutch artist Rembrandt  may be false. The contested paint ings are not 
minor works, whose removal from the Rembrandt corpus would leave it relatively unaffected: 
they are at its very center. In her recent book,  Svetlana A lpers uses these cases of disputed 
attribution as a point of departure  for her provocative  discussion of the radical distinctiveness of 
Rembrandts approach to painting . 
Alpers argues that Rembrandt exercised an unprecedentedly firm control over his art, his 
students, and the distribution of his works. Despite Gary Schwartz brilliant documentation of 
Rembrandts complicated relations with a wide circle of patrons , Alpers takes the view that 
Rembrandt refused to submit to the prevailing patronage system. He pr eferred, she claims, to 
sell his works on the open market and to play the entrepreneur. At a time when Dutch artists 
were organizing into professional brotherhoods  and academies , Rembrandt stood apart. In fact, 
Alpers portrait of Rembrandt shows virtually every aspect of his art pervaded by economic 
motives. Indeed, so complete was Rembrandts involvement with the market, she argues, that 
he even presented himself as commodity, viewing his studio s products as extensions of himself, 
sent out into the world to earn money. Alpers asserts that Rembrandts enterprise is found not 
just in his paintings, but in his refusal to limit his enterprise to those paintings he actually 
painted. He marketed Rembr andt. 
Although there may be some truth in the view that Rembrandt was an entrepreneur who 
made some aesthetic decisions on the basis of what he knew the market wanted , Alpers 
emphasis on economic factors sacrifices discussions of the aesthetic qualities t hat make 
Rembrandts work unique. For example, Alpers asserts that Rembrandt deliberately left his 
works unfinished so as to get more money for their revision and completion. She implies that  LSAT  947 
 Rembrandt actually wished the Council of Amsterdam to refuse the  great Claudius Civilis , which 
they had commissioned for their new town hall, and she argues that he must have calculated  
that he would be able to get more money by retouching [the] painting. Certainly the picture is 
painted with very broad strokes but t here is no evidence that it was deliberately left unfinished. 
The fa ct is that the look of a work like Claudius Civilis  must also be understood as the 
consequence of Rembrandts powerful and profound meditations on painting itself. Alpers make 
no mention o f the pictorial dialect ic that can be discerned between, say, the lessons Rembrandt 
absorbed from the Haarlem school of paintings and the styles of his native Leiden . The trouble 
is that while Rembrandt s artistic enterprise may indeed not be reducible to the works he 
himself painted, it is not reducible to marketing practices either.  
1. Which one of the following best summarizes the main conclusion of the author of 
the pas sage? 
(A) Rembrandt differed from other artists of his time both in his aesthetic 
techniques and in his desire to meet the demands of the marketplace.  
(B) The aesthetic qualities of Rembrandts work cannot be understood without 
consideration of how economic motives pervaded decisions he made about 
his art.  
(C) Rembran dt was one of the firs t artists to develop the notion of a work of art as 
a commodity that could be sold in an open marketplace.  
(D) Rembrandts artistic achievement cannot be understood solely in terms of 
decisions he made on the basis of what would sell in the marketplace.  
(E) Rembrandt was an entrepreneur whose artistic enterprise was not limited to 
the paintings he actually painted himself.  
2. According to the passage, Alpers and Schwartz disagree about which one of the 
following?  
(A) the degree of control Rembrandt exerc ised over the production of his art  
(B) the role that Rembrandt played in organizing professional brotherhoods and 
academies  
(C) the kinds of relationships Rembrandt had with his students  
(D) the degree of Rembrandts involvement in the patronage system  
(E) the role of the patronage system in seventeenth -century Holland  
3. In the third paragraph, the author of the passage discusses aesthetic influences on 
Rembrandts work most probably in order to  
(A) suggest that many critics have neglected to study the  influence of the 
Haarlem school painters on Rembrandts work  
(B) suggest that Claudius Civilis  is similar in style to many pai ntings from the 
seventeen century  
(C) suggest that Rembrandts style was not affected by the aesth etic influences 
that Alpers poi nts out  
(D) argue that Rembrandts style can best be understood as a result of the 948 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 influences of his native Leiden  
(E) indicate that Alpers has not taken into account some important aspects of 
Rembrandts work  
4. Which one of the following, if true, wou ld provide the most support for Alpers 
argument about Claudius Civilis ? 
(A) R embrandt was constantly revising his prints and paintings because he was 
never fully satisfied with stylistic aspects of his earlier drafts.  
(B) The works of many seventeenth -century Dutch artists were painted with 
broad strokes and had an unfinished look.  
(C) Many of Rembrandts contemporaries eschewed the patronage system and 
sold their works on the open market.  
(D) Artists were frequently able to raise the price of a painting i f the buyer 
wanted the work revised in some way.  
(E) Rembrandt did not allow his students to work on paintings that were 
commissioned by public officials.  
5. It can be in ferred that the author of the passage and Alpers would be most likely 
to agree on w hich one of the following?  
(A) Rembrandt made certain aesthetic decision on the basis of what he 
understood about the demands of the marketplace.  
(B) The Rembrandt corpus will not be affected if attributions of paintings to 
Rembrandt are found to be false.  
(C) Stylistic aspects of Rembrandts painting can be better explained in economic 
terms than in historical or aesthetic terms.  
(D) Certain aesthetic aspects of Rembrandts art are the result of his 
experimentation with different painting techniques.  
(E) Most of Rembrandts best -known works were painted by his students, but 
were sold under Rembrandts name.  
Medievalists  usually distinguish  medieval public law  from private law : the former was 
concern ed with government and military affairs and the latter with the family, social status, and 
land transactions. Examination on medieval womens lives shows this distinction to be overly 
simplistic. Although medieval women were legally excluded from roles tha t categorized as 
public, such as solider, justice, jury member, or professional administrative official, womens 
control of land usually considered a private or domestic phenomenon had important political 
implications in the feudal system of thirteenth -century England. Since land equaled wealth and 
wealth equaled power, certain women exercised influence by controlling land. Unlike unmarried 
women who were legally subject to their guardians or married women who had no legal identity 
separate from their husba nds, women who were widows had autonomy with respect to 
acquiring or disposing of certain property, suing in court, incurring liability for their own debts, 
and making wills.  
Although feudal lands were normally transferred through  primogeniture (the eldest son 
inheriting all) , when no sons survived, the surviving daughters inherited equal shares under  LSAT  949 
 what was known as partible  inheritance. In addition to controlling any such land inherited from 
her parents and any bridal dowry property a woman brought to the marriage from her own 
family a widow was entitled to use of one -third of her late husbands lands. Called  dower  in 
England, this grant had greater legal importan ce under common law than did the bridal dowry ; 
no marriage was legal unless the groom endowed  the bride with this property at the wedding 
ceremony. In 1215 Magna Carta  guaranteed a widows right to claim her dower without paying 
a fine; this document also strengthened widows ability to control land by prohibiting forced 
remarriage. After 1272 women could also benefit  from jointure : the groom could agree to hold 
part or all of his lands jointly with the bride, so that if one spouse died, the other received these 
lands.  
Since many widows had inheritances as well as dowers, wi dows were frequently the 
financial heads of the family ; even though legal theory assumed the maintenance of the 
principle of primogeniture, the amount of land the widow controlled could exceed that of her 
son or of other male heirs. Anyone who held feudal land exercised authority over the people 
attached to the land knights, rental tenants, and peasants and had to  hire estate 
administrators , oversee  accounts , receive  rents, protect  tenants from outside encroachment , 
punish  tenants for not paying rents , appoint priests to local parishes , and act  as guardians of 
tenants children and executors o f their wills. Many married women fulfilled these duties as 
deputies for husbands away at court or at war, but widows could act on their own behalf. 
Widows legal indep endence is suggested by their frequent appearance in thirteenth -century 
English legal records. Moreover, the scope of their sway is indicated by the fact that some 
controlled not merely single estates, but multiple counties.  
6. Which one of the following best expresses the main idea of the passage?  
(A) The traditional view of medieval women as legally excluded from man y 
public offices fails to consider thirteenth -century women in England who 
were exempted from such restrictions.  
(B) The economic independence of women in thirteenth -century England was 
primarily determined not by their marital status, but by their status as heirs to 
their parents estates.  
(C) The laws and customs of the feudal system in thirteenth -century England 
enabled some women to exercise a certain amount of power despite their 
legal exclusion from most public roles.  
(D) During the thirteenth century  in England, widows gained greater autonomy 
and legal rights to their property than they had had in previous centuries.  
(E) Widows in thirteenth -century England were able to acquire and dispose of 
lands through a number of different legal processes.  
7. With which one of the following statements about the views held by the 
medievalists mentioned in line 1 would the author of the passage most probably 
agree? 
(A) The medieval role of landowners was less affected by thirteenth -century 
changes in law than the se medievalists customarily have recognized.  
(B) The realm of law labeled public by these medievalists ultimately had greater 950 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 political implications than that labeled private.  
(C) The amount of wealth controlled by medieval women was greater than these 
medievalists have recorded.  
(D) The distinction made by these medievalists between private law and public 
law fails to consider some of the actual legal cases of the period.  
(E) The distinction made by these medievalists between private and public law 
fails to address the political importance of control over land in the medieval 
era. 
8. Which one of the following most accurately expresses the meaning of the world 
sway as it is used in line 60 of the passage?  
(A) vacillation  
(B) dominion  
(C) predisposition  
(D) inclination  
(E) mediation  
9. Which one of the following most accurately describes the function of the second 
paragraph of the passage?  
(A) providing examples of specific historical events as support for the conclusion 
drawn in the third paragraph  
(B) narrating a sequence of events whose outcomes discussed in the third 
paragraph  
(C) explaining how circumstances described in the first paragraph could have 
occurred  
(D) describing the effects of an event mentioned in the first paragraph  
(E) evaluatin g the arguments of a group mentioned in the first paragraph  
10. According to information in the passage, a widow in early thirteenth -century 
England could control more land than did her eldest son if  
(A) the widow had been granted the customary amount of d ower land and the 
eldest son inherited the rest of the land  
(B) the widow had three daughters in addition to her eldest son  
(C) the principle of primogeniture had been applied in transferring the lands 
owned by the widows late husband  
(D) none of the land s held by the widows late husband had been placed in 
jointure  
(E) the combined amount of land the widow had acquired from her own family 
and from dower was greater than the amount inherited by her son  
11. Which one of the following is mentioned in the passage as a reason why a 
married woman might have fulfilled certain duties associated with holding feudal 
land in thirteenth -century England?   LSAT  951 
 (A) the legal statutes set forth by Magna Carta  
(B) the rights a woman held over her inheritance during her marri age 
(C) the customary division of duties between husbands and wives  
(D) the absence of the womans husband  
(E) the terms specified by the womans jointure agreement  
12. The phrase in England (line  30-31) does which one of the following?  
(A) It suggest s that women in other countries also received grants of their 
husbands lands.  
(B) It identifies a particular code of law affecting women who were surviving 
daughters.  
(C) It demonstrates that dower had greater legal importance in one European 
county than in others.  
(D) It emphasizes that women in one European country had more means of 
controlling property than did women in other European countries.  
(E) It traces a legal term back to the time at which it entered the language.  
13. The primary purpose of t he passage is to  
(A) explain a legal controversy of the past in light of modern theory  
(B) evaluate the economic and legal status of a particular historical group  
(C) resolve a scholarly debate about legal history  
(D) trace the historical origins of a mode rn economic situation  
(E) provide new evidence about a historical event  
The debate over the environment crisis is not new : anxiety about industrys impact on the 
environment has existed for over a century. What is new is the extreme polarization of view s. 
Mounting evidence of humanitys capacity to damage the environment irreversibly coupled with 
suspicions that government, industry, and even science might be impotent to prevent 
environmental destruction have provoked accusatory polemics on the part of e nvironmentalists. 
In turn, these polemics have elicited a corresponding backlash  from industry. The sad effect of 
this polarization is that it is now even more difficult for indus try than it was a hundred years ago 
to respond appropriately to impact analyses that demand action.  
Unlike todays adversaries, earlier ecological reformers shared with advocates of industrial 
growth a confidence in timely corrective action. George P. Mars hs pioneering conservation 
tract Man and Nature  (1864) elicited wide acclaim without embittered denials. Man and Nature  
castigated Earths despoilers for heedless greed, declaring that humanity has brought the face 
of the Earth to a desolation almost as complete as that of the Moon. But no entrepreneur of 
industrialists sought to refute Marshs accusations, to defend the gutting  of forests or the 
slaughter of wildli fe as economically essential, or to dismiss his ecological warnings as 
hysterical. To the contrary, they generally agreed with him.  
Why? Marsh and his followers took environmental improvement and economic progress as 
givens : they disputed not the desirabil ity of conquering nature but the bungling way in which 
the conquest was carried out. B lame was not personalized , Marsh denounced genera l greed 952 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 rather than particular entrepreneurs, and the media did not hound  malefactors. Further, 
corrective measures seemed to entail no sacrifice, to demand no draconian remedies. 
Self-interest underwrote  most prescribed reforms. Marshs emphasis on future stewardship  was 
then a widely accepted ideal (if not practice). His ecological admonitions were in keeping with 
the Enlightenment premise that humanitys mission was to subdue and transform nature.  
Not until the 1960s did a gloomier perspect ive gain popular ground. Fredric Clements 
equilibrium model of ecology, developed in the 1930s, seemed consistent with mounting 
environmental disasters. In this view, nature was most fruitful when least altered. Left 
undisturbed, flora and fauna gradually  attained maximum diversity and stability. Despoliation 
thwarted the culmination or shortened the duration of this beneficent climax: technology did 
not improve nature but destroyed it.  
The equilibrium model became an ecological mystique: environmental int erference was 
now taboo, wilderness adored . Nature as unfinished fabric perfected by human ingenuity gave 
way to the image nature debased and endangered by technology . In contrast to the 
Enlightenment vision of nature, according to which rational managers construct an ever more 
improved environment, twentieth -century reformers vision of nature calls for a reduction of 
human interference in order to restore environmental stability.  
14. Which one of the following most accurately states the main idea of the p assage?  
(A) Mounting evidence of humanitys capacity to damage the environment should 
motivate action to prevent further damage.  
(B) The ecological mystique identified with Frederic Clements has become a 
religious conviction among ecological reformers.  
(C) George P. Marshs ideas about conservation and stewardship have heavily 
influenced the present debate over the environment.  
(D) The views of ecologists and industrial growth advocates concerning the 
environment have only recently become polarized.  
(E) General greed, rather than particular individuals or industries, should be 
blamed for the environmental crisis.  
15. The author refers to the equilibrium model of ecology as an ecological 
mystique (liens 54 -55) most likely in order to do which one of the following?  
(A) underscore the fervor with which twentieth -century reformers adhere to the 
equilibrium model  
(B) point out that the equilibrium model of ecology has recently been supported 
by empirical scientific research  
(C) express appreciation for how pl ants and animals attain maximum diversity 
and stability when left alone  
(D) indicate that the idea of twentieth -century ecological reformers are often so 
theoretical as to be difficult to understand  
(E) indicate how widespread support is for the equilib rium model of ecology in 
the scientific community   LSAT  953 
 16. Which one of the following practices is most clearly an application of Frederic 
Clements equilibrium model of ecology?  
(A) introducing a species into an environment to which it is not help control the 
spread of another species that no longer has any natural predators  
(B) developing incentives for industries to take corrective measures to protect the 
environment  
(C) using scientific methods to increase the stability of plants and animals in 
areas where s pecies are in danger of becoming extinct  
(D) using technology to develop plant and animal resources but balancing that 
development with stringent restrictions on technology  
(E) setting areas of land aside to be maintained as wilderness from which the us e 
of extraction of natural resources is prohibited  
17. The passage suggests that George P. Marsh and todays ecological reformers 
would be most likely to agree with which one of the following statements?  
(A) Regulating industries in order to protect the en vironment does not conflict 
with the self interest of those industries.  
(B) Solving the environmental crisis does not require drastic and costly remedies . 
(C) Human despoliation of the Earth has caused widespread environmental 
damage.  
(D) Environmental imp rovement and economic progress are equally important 
goals . 
(E) Rather than blaming specific industries, general greed should be denounced as 
the cause of environmental destruction.  
18. The passage is primarily concerned with which one of the following?  
(A) providing examples of possible solutions to a current crisis  
(B) explaining how conflicting viewpoints in a current debate are equally valid  
(C) determining which of two conflicting viewpoints in a current debate is more 
persuasive  
(D) outlining the b ackground and development of conflicting viewpoints in a 
current debate  
(E) demonstrating weaknesses in the arguments made by one side in a current 
debate  
 
Recently the focus of historical studies of different ethnic groups in the United States has 
shifted from  the transformation of ethnic identity to its preservation. Whereas earlier historians 
argued that the ethnic identity o f various immigrant groups to the United States blended to 
form an American national character , the ne w scholarship has focused on the transplantation of 
ethnic cultures to the United States. Fugita and OBriens Japanese American Ethnicity  provides 
an example of this recent trend ; it also exemplifies a problem that is common to such 
scholarship.  954 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 In compar ing the first three generations of Japanese Americans (the Iss ei, Nisei, and 
Sansei) , Fugita and OBrien conclude that assimilation to United States culture increased among 
Japanese Americans over three generations, but that a sense of ethnic community end ured. 
Although the persistence of community is stressed by the authors, their emphasis in the book 
could just as easily have been on the high degree of assimilation of the Japanese American 
population in the late twentieth century, which Fugita and OBrien  believe is demonstrated by 
the high levels of education , income, and occupational mobility achieved by Japanese 
Americans. In addition, their data reveal that the character of the ethnic community itself 
changed : the integration of Sanseis into new profes sional communities and nonethnic voluntary 
associations meant at the very least  that ethnic ties had to accommodate multiple and la yered 
identi ties. Fugita and OBrien themselves acknowledge  that there has been a weakening of 
Japanese American ethnic community life.  
Because of the social changes weakening the bonds of community , Fugita and OBrien 
maintain that the community cohesion of Japanese Americans is notable not for its initial 
intensity but because there remains a degree of involvement in the ethnic community 
surpassing that found in  most other ethnic groups at similar points in their ethnic group life 
cycle. This comparative difference is important to Fugita and OBrien, an d they hypothesize 
that the Japanese American community persisted in the face of assimilation because of a 
particularly strong preexisting sense of  peoplehood . They argue that this sense of peoplehood 
extended be yond local and family ties.  
Fugita and OBrien have explained persistence of ethnic community by citing a preexisting 
sense of national consciousness that is independent of how a group adapts to United States 
culture. However, it is difficult to prove as F ugita and OBrien have attempted to do that a sense 
of peoplehood is a distinct phenomenon . Historians should instead attempt to identify directly 
the factors that sustain community cohesion in generations that have adapted to United States 
culture and bee n exposed to the pluralism  of American life.  
19. Which one of the following best summarizes the main point of the author of the 
passage?  
(A) Fugita and OBriens study provides a comparison of the degree of 
involvement in ethnic community of different groups in the Uni ted States.  
(B) Fugita and OBriens study describes the assimilation of three generations of 
Japanese Americans to United States culture.  
(C) Fugita and OBriens study illustrates both a recent trend in historical studies 
of ethnic groups and a problem t ypical of that trend.  
(D) Historical studies of ethnic preservation among Japanese Americans have 
done much to define the interpretive frameworks for studies of other ethnic 
groups.  
(E) Historical studies are more concerned with the recent development o f ethnic 
communities in the United States than with the process of adaptation to 
United States culture.  
20. According to the passage, Fugita and OBriens data indicate which one of the 
following about the Japanese American ethnic community?   LSAT  955 
 (A) Community bonds have weakened primarily as a result of occupational 
mobility by Japanese Americans.  
(B) The community is notable because it has accommodated multiple and layered 
identities without losing its traditional intensity.  
(C) Community cohesion is similar i n intensity to the community cohesion of 
other ethnic groups that have been in the United States for the same period 
of time.  
(D) Community involvement weakened during the second generation, but 
strengthened as the third generation regained an interest in cultural 
traditions.  
(E) The nature of the community has been altered by Japanese American 
participation in new professional communities and nonethnic voluntary 
associations.  
21. Which one of the following provides an example of a research study that ha s 
conclusion most analogous to that argued for by the historians mentioned in line 
4? 
(A) a study showing how musical forms brought from other countries have 
persisted in the United States  
(B) a study showing the organization and function of ethnic associa tions in the 
United States  
(C) a study showing how architectural styles brought from other counties have 
merged to form an American style  
(D) a study showing how cultural traditions have been preserved for generations 
in American ethic neighborhoods  
(E) a study showing how different religious practices brought from other 
countries have been sustained in the United States  
22. According to the passage, which one of the following is true about the focus of 
historical studies on ethnic groups in the United S tates? 
(A) Current studies are similar to earlier studies in claiming that a sense of 
peoplehood helps preserve ethnic community.  
(B) Current studies have clearly identified factors that sustain ethnic community 
in generations that have been exposed to the  pluralism of American life.  
(C) Current studies examine the cultural practices that make up the American 
national character.  
(D) Earlier studies focused on how ethnic identities became transformed in the 
United States.  
(E) Earlier studies focused on th e factors that led people to immigrate to the 
United States.  
23. The author of the passage quotes Fugita and OBrien in lines 36 -39 most 
probably in order to  956 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (A) point out a weakness in their hypothesis about the strength of community ties 
among Japanese A mericans  
(B) show how they support their claim about the notability of community 
cohesion for Japanese Americans  
(C) indicate how they demonstrate the high degree of adaptation of Japanese 
Americans to United States culture  
(D) suggest that they have inacc urately compared Japanese Americans to other 
ethnic groups in the United States  
(E) emphasize their con tention that the Japanese American sense of peoplehood 
extended beyond local and family ties  
24. The passage suggests that the author would be most li kely to describe the 
hypothesis mentioned in line 47 as  
(A) highly persuasive  
(B) original but poorly developed  
(C) difficult to substantiate  
(D) illogical and uninteresting  
(E) too similar to earlier theories  
25. The passage suggest s which one of the f ollowing about the historians mentioned 
in line 49?  
(A) They have been unable to provide satisfactory explanations for the 
persistence of European ethnic communities in the United States.  
(B) They have suggested that European cultural practices ha ve survived although 
the community ties of European ethnic groups have weakened . 
(C) They have hypothesized that European ethnic communities are based on 
family ties rather than on a sense of national consciousness.  
(D) They have argued that European cultu ral traditions have been transformed in 
the United States because of the pluralism of American life . 
(E) They have claimed that the community ties of European Americans are still as 
strong as they were when the immigrants first arrived.  
26. As the ir vie ws are discussed in the passage, Fugita and OBrien would be most 
likely to agree with which one of the following?  
(A) The community cohesion of an ethnic group is not affected by the length of 
time it has been in the United States.  
(B) An ethnic group in the United States can have a high degree of adaptation to 
United States culture and still sustain strong community ties.  
(C) The strength of an ethnic community in the United States is primarily 
dependent on the strength of local and family ties.  
(D) High levels of education and occupational mobility necessarily erode the 
community cohesion of an ethnic group in the United States.   LSAT  957 
 (E) It has become increasingly difficult for ethnic groups to sustain any sense of 
ethnic identity in the pluralism of United  States life.  
LSAT   27    SECTION I  
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one  
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
Most office workers  assume that the messages they send to each other via electronic mail 
are as private as a telephone call or a face -to-face meeting. That assumption is wrong. 
Although it is illegal in many areas for an employer to eavesdrop on private conversations or 
telephone calls even if they take place on a company -owned telephone there are no clear 
rules governing electronic mail. In fact, the question of how private electronic mail 
transmissions should be has emerged as one of the more complicated legal issues of the  
electronic age . 
Peoples opinions about the degree of privacy that electronic mail should have vary 
depending on whose electronic mail system is being used and who is reading the messages. 
Does a government office, for example, have  the right to destroy electronic messages created 
in the course of  running the government, thereby denying public access to such documents? 
Some hold that government offices should issue guidelines that allow their staff to d elete such 
electronic records, and defend this practice by claiming that the messages thus deleted already 
exist in paper versions whose destruction is forbidden. Opponents of such practices argue that 
the paper versions often omit such information as who received the messages and when they 
received them, information commonly carried on electronic mail systems. Government officials, 
opponents maintain, are civil servants ; the public should thus have the right to review any 
documents created during the condu cting of government business.  
Questions about electronic mail privacy have also arisen in the private sector. Recently, 
two employees of an automotive company were discovered to have been communicating 
disparaging information about their supervisor via ele ctronic mail. The supervisor, who had 
been monitoring the communication, threatened to fire the employees. When the employees 
filed a grievance  complaining that their privacy had been violated, they were let go . Later, their 
court case for unlawful termination was dismissed ; the companys lawyers successfully argued 
that because the company owned the computer system, its supervisors had the right to read 
anything created on i t. 
In some areas, laws prohibit outside interception of electronic mail by a third party without 
proper authorization such as a search warrant . However, these laws do not cover inside 
interception such as occurred at the automotiv e company. In the past , courts have ruled that 
interoffice communications may be considered private only if employees have a reasonable 
expectation of privacy when they send the messages. The fact is that no absolute guarantee of 
privacy exists in any co mputer system. The only solution may be for users to scramble  their 
own messages with encrypt ion codes ; unfortunately, such complex codes are likely to 958 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 undermine the principal virtue of electronic mail: its convenience.  
1. Which one of the following statements most accurately summarizes the main 
point of the passage?  
(A) Until the legal questions surrounding the privacy of electronic mail in both 
the public and private sectors have been resolved, office workers will need 
to scramble their electronic mail messages with encryption codes.  
(B) The legal questions surrounding the privacy of electronic m ail in the work 
place can best be resolved by treating such communications as if they were 
as private as telephone conversations or face -to-face meetings.  
(C) Any attempt to resolve the legal questions surrounding the privacy of 
electronic mail in the work place must take into account the essential 
difference between public -sector and private sector business.  
(D) At present, in both the public and private sectors, there seem to be no clear 
general answers to the  legal questions surrounding the privacy of  electronic 
mail in the workplace.  
(E) The legal questions surrounding the privacy of electronic mail in the 
workplace of electronic mail in the workplace can best be resolved by 
allowing supervisors in public -sector but not private -sector offices to 
monito r their employees communications.  
2. According to the passage, which one of the following best expresses the reason 
some people use to oppose the deletion of electronic mail records at government 
offices?  
(A) Such deletion reveals the extent of government s unhealthy obsession with 
secrecy.  
(B) Such deletion runs counter to the notion of governments accountability to its 
constituency.  
(C) Such deletion clearly violates the legal requirement that government offices 
keep duplicate copies of all their transa ctions.  
(D) Such deletion violates the governments own guidelines against destruction of 
electronic records.  
(E) Such deletion harms relations between government employees and their 
supervisors.  
3. Which one of the following most accurately states the organization of the 
passage? 
(A) A problem is introduced, followed by specific examples illustrating the 
problem: a possible solution is suggested, followed by an acknowledgment 
of its shortcomings.  
(B) A problem is introduced, followed by explications  of two possible solutions to 
the problem: the first solution is preferred to the second, and reasons are 
given for why it is the better alternative.   LSAT  959 
 (C) A problem is introduced, followed by analysis of the historical circumstances 
that helped bring the proble m about a possible solution is offered and 
rejected as being only a partial remedy.  
(D) A problem is introduced, followed by enumeration of various questions that 
need to be answered before a solution can be found: one possible solution is 
proposed and arg ued for.  
(E) A problem is introduced, followed by descriptions of two contrasting 
approaches to thinking about the problem: the second approach is preferred 
to the first, and reasons are given for why it is more likely to yield a 
successful solution.  
4. Based on the passage, the author s attitude towards interception of electronic mail 
can most accurately be described as:  
(A) outright disapproval of the practice  
(B) support for employers who engage in it  
(C) support for employees who lose their jobs beca use of it  
(D) intellectual interest in its legal issues  
(E) cynicism about the motives behind the practice  
5. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would most likely hol d which 
one of the following opinions about an encryption  system that could encodes and 
decode electronic mail messages with a single keystroke ? 
(A) It would be an unreasonable burden on a companys ability to monitor 
electronic mail created by its employees.  
(B) It would significantly reduce the difficulty of attempting to safeguard the 
privacy of electronic mail.  
(C) It would create substantial legal complications for companies trying to 
prevent employees from revealing trade secrets to competitors.  
(D) It would guarantee only a minimal level of employee privacy, and so wou ld 
not be worth the cost involved in installing such a system.  
(E) It would require a change in the legal definition of reasonable expectation of 
privacy as it applies to employer -employee relations.  
6. Given the information in the passage, which one of the following hypothetical 
events is LEAST likely to occur?  
(A) A court rules that a government offices practice of deleting its electronic mail 
is not in the publics best interests.  
(B) A private -sector employer is found liable for wiretapping an off ice telephone 
conversation in which two employees exchanged disparaging information 
about their supervisor.  
(C) A court upholds the right of a government office to destroy both paper and 
electronic versions of its in -house documents.  
(D) A court upholds a private -sector employers right to monitor messages sent 960 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 between employees over the companys in -house electronic mail system.  
(E) A court rules in favor of a private -sector employee whose supervisor stated 
that in -house electronic mail would not be mon itored but later fired the 
employee for communicating disparaging information via electronic mail.  
7. The authors primary purpose in writing the passage is to  
(A) demonstrate that the individual right to privacy has been eroded by advances 
in computer tec hnology  
(B) compare the legal status of electronic mail in the public and private sectors  
(C) draw an extended analogy between the privacy of electronic mail and the 
privacy of telephone conversations or face -to-face meeting  
(D) illustrate the complexities  of the privacy issues surrounding electronic mail in 
the workplace  
(E) explain why the courts have not been able to rule definitely on the issue of the 
privacy of electronic mail  
While a new surge of critical interest in the ancient Greek poems convent ionally ascribed to 
Homer has taken place in the last twenty years or so, it was nonspecialists rather than 
professional scholars who studied the poetic aspects of the Iliad and the Odyssey  between, 
roughly , 1935 and 1970.  During these years, while such no nacademic intellectuals as Simone 
Weil and Erich Auerbach were trying to define the qualities that made  these epic accounts of 
the Trojan War and its aftermath great poetry , the questions that occupied the specialists were 
directed elsewhere: Did the Trojan War  really happen? Does the bard preserve 
Indo-European folk memories? How did the poems get written down ? Something was driving 
scholars away from the actual works to peripheral issues. Scholars produced bo oks about 
archaeology, about gift -exchange in ancient societies, about the development of oral poetry, 
about virtually anything except the Iliad and the  Odyssey themselves as unique reflections or 
distillations of life itself as, in short, great poetry. Th e observations of the English poet 
Alexander Pope seemed as applicable in 1970 as they had been when he wrote them in 1715: 
according to Pope, the remarks of critics are rather Philosophical, Historical, Geographicor  
rather anything than Critical and Poe tical.  
Ironically, the modern manifestation of this nonpoetical  emphasis can be traced to the 
profoundly influential work of Milman Parry, who attempted to demonstrate in detail how the 
Homeric poems , believed to have been recorded nearly three thousand  years ago, were the 
products of a long and highly developed tradition of oral poetry about the Trojan  War. Parry 
proposed that this tradition built up its diction and its content by a process of constant 
accumulation and refinement over many gen erations of storytellers. But after Parrys death in 
1935, his legacy was taken up by scholars who, unlike Parry, forsook intensive analysis of the 
poetry itself and focused instead on only one element of Parrys work: the creative limitations 
and possibil ities of oral composition, concerning on fixed elements and inflexibilities, focusing 
on the things that oral poetry allegedly can and cannot do.  The dryness if this kind of study 
drove many of the more inventive scholars away from the poems into the rapid ly developing 
field of Homers archaeological and historical background.  
Appropriately, Milman Parrys son Adam was among those scholars responsible for a  LSAT  961 
 renewed interest in Homers poetry as literary art. Building on his fathers work, the younger 
Parry argued that the Homeric poems exist both within and against a tradition. The Iliad and 
the Odyssey  were, Adam Parry thought, the beneficiaries of an inherited store of diction, 
scenes, and at the same time highly individual works that surpasses these conve ntions. Adam 
Parry helped prepare the ground for the recent Homeric revival by affirming his fathers belief in 
a strong inherited tradition, but also by emphasizing Homers unique contributions within that 
tradition.  
8. Which one of the following best sta tes the main idea of the passage?  
(A) The Homeric poems are most fruitfully studied as records of the time and 
place in which they were written.  
(B) The Homeric poems are the products of a highly developed and complicated 
tradition of oral poetry.  
(C) The Homeric poems are currently enjoying a resurgence of critical interest 
after an age of scholarship largely devoted to the poems nonpoetic elements.  
(D) The Homeric poems are currently enjoying a resurgence of scholarly interest 
after am age during which m ost studies were authored by nonacademic 
writers.  
(E) Before Milman Parry published his pioneering work in the early twentieth 
century, it was difficult to assign a date or an author to the Homeric poems.  
9. According to the passage, the work of Simone Weil and Erich Auerbach on 
Homer was primarily concerned with which one of the following?  
(A) considerations of why criticism of Homer had moved to peripheral issues  
(B) analyses of the poetry itself in terms of its literary qualities  
(C) studies in the hi story and nature of oral poetry  
(D) analyses of the already ancient epic tradition inherited by Homer  
(E) critiques of the highly technical analyses of academic critics  
10. The passage suggests which one of the following about scholarship on Homer 
that has appeared since 1970?  
(A) It has dealt extensively with the Homeric poems as literary art.  
(B) It is more incisive than the work of the Parrys.  
(C) It has rejected as irrelevant the scholarship  produced by specialists between 
1935 and 1970.  
(D) It has i gnored the work of Simone Weil and Erich Auerbach.  
(E) It has attempted to confirm that the Iliad  and the Odyssey  were written by 
Homer.  
11. The author of the passage most probably quotes Alexander Pope (lines  24-26) in 
order to  
(A) indicate that the Ho meric poems have generally received poor treatment at 
the hands of English critics  962 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (B) prove that poets as well as critics have emphasized elements peripheral to the 
poems  
(C) illustrate that the nonpoetical emphasis also existed in an earlier century  
(D) emphasize the problems inherent in rendering classical Greek poetry into 
modern English  
(E) argue that poets and literary critics have seldom agreed the interpretation of 
poetry  
12. According to the passage, which one of the following is true of Milman Parrys 
immediate successors in the field of Homeric studies?  
(A) They reconciled Homers poetry with archaeological and historical concerns.  
(B) They acknowledged the tradition of oral poetry, but focused on the 
uniqueness of Homers poetry within the tra dition.  
(C) They occupied themselves with the question of what qualities made for great 
poetry.  
(D) They emphasized the boundaries of oral poetry.  
(E) They called for a revival of Homers popularity.  
13. Which one of the following best describes the org anization of the passage?  
(A) A situation is identified and its origins are examines.  
(B) A series of hypotheses is reviewed and one is advocated.  
(C) The works of two influential scholars are summarized.  
(D) Several issues contributing to a currently deba te are summarized.  
(E) Three possible solutions to a long -standing problem are posed.  
Even in the midst of  its resurgence as a vital tradition, many sociologists have viewed the 
current form of the powwow , a ceremonial gathering of native Americans, as a sign that tribal 
culture is in decline. Focusing on the dances and rituals th at have recently come to be shared 
by most tribes, they suggest that an intertribal movement is now in ascension and claim the 
inevitable outcome of this tendency is the eventual dissolution of tribes and the complete 
assimilation of native Americans  into Euroamerican society. Proponents of this Pan-Indian  
theory point to the greater frequency of travel and communication between reservations, the 
greater urbanization  of native Americans, and, most recently, their increasing politicization in 
response to c ommon grievances  as the chief causes of the shift toward  intertribalism.  
Indeed, the rapid diffusion of dance styles, outfits , and songs from one reservation to 
another offers co mpelling evidence that intertribalism has been increasing. However, these 
sociologists have failed to note the concurrent revitalization of many traditions unique to 
individual tribes. Among the Lakota , for instance, the Sun Dance was revived, after a forty -year 
hiatus , during the 1950s. Similarly, the Black Legging Society of the Kiowa and the Hethuska 
Society of the Ponca both traditional groups within th eir respective tribes have gained new 
popularity. Obviously, a more complex societal shift is taking place than the theory of 
Pan-Indianism can account for.  
An examination of the theorys underpinnings may be critical at this point, especially given  LSAT  963 
 that native Americans themselves chafe  most against  the Pan -Indian classification. Like other 
assimilationist theories with which it is associated, the Pan -Indian view is predicted upo n an a 
priori assumption about the nature of cultural contact: that upon contact minority societies 
immediately begin to succumb  in every respect biologically, linguistically, and culturally to 
the majority society. However, there is no evidence that this is happening to native American 
groups.  
Yet the fa ct remains that intertribal activities are a major facet of native American cultural 
today. Certain dances at powwows, for instance, are announced as intertribal, others as 
traditional. Likewise, speeches given at the beginnings of powwows are often delive red in 
English, while the prayer that follows is usually spoken in a native language. Cultural borrowing 
is, of course, old news. What is important to note is the conscious distinction  native Americans 
make  between  tribal and intertribal tendencies.  
Tribal ism, although greatly altered by modern history, remains a potent force among 
native Americans. It forms a basis for tribal identity, and aligns music and dance with other 
social and cultural activities important to individual tribes. Intertribal activitie s, on the other 
hand, reinforce native American identity along a broader front, where this identity is directly 
threatened by outside influences.  
14. Which one of the following best summarizes the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Despite the fact that sociolo gists have only recently begun to understand its 
importance, intertribalism has always been an influential factor in native 
American culture.  
(B) Native Americans are currently struggling with an identity crisis caused 
primarily by the two competing forces  of tribalism and intertribalism.  
(C) The recent growth of intertribalism is unlikely to eliminate tribalism because 
the two forces do not oppose one another but instead reinforce distinct 
elements of native American interact with the broader community aro und 
them.  
(D) The tendency toward intertribalism, although prevalent within native 
American culture, has had a minimal effect on the way native Americans 
interact with the broader community around them.  
(E) Despite the recent revival of many native Amer ican tribal traditions, the 
recent trend toward intertribalism is likely to erode cultural differences 
among the various native American tribes.  
15. The author most likely states that cultural borrowing is of course, old news 
(line 47-48) primarily to  
(A) acknowledge that in itself the existence of intertribal tendencies at powwows 
is unsurprising  
(B) suggest that native Americans use of English in powwows should be 
accepted as unavoidable  
(C) argue that the deliberate distinction of intertribal and trad itional dances is not 
a recent development  964 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (D) suggest that the recent increase in intertribal activity is the result of native 
Americans borrowing from non -native Americans  
(E) indicate that the powwow itself could have originated by combining practice s 
drawn from both native and non -native American cultures  
16. The author of the passage would most likely agree with which one of the 
following assertions?  
(A) Though some believe the current form of the powwow signals the decline of 
tribal culture, the po wwow contains elements that indicate the continuing 
strength of tribalism.  
(B) The logical outcome of the recent increase in intertribal activity is the 
eventual disappearance of tribal culture.  
(C) Native Americans who participate in both tribal and inter tribal activities 
usually base their identities on intertribal rather than tribal affiliations.  
(D) The conclusions of some sociologists about the health of native American 
cultures show that these sociologists are in fact biased against such cultures.  
(E) Until it is balanced by revitalization of tribal customs, intertribalism will 
continue to weaken the native American sense of identity.  
17. The primary function of the third paragraph is to  
(A) search for evidence to corroborate the basic assumption of  he theory of 
Pan-Indianism  
(B) demonstrate the incorrectness of the theory of Pan -Indianism by pointing out 
that native American groups themselves disagree with the theory  
(C) explain the origin of the theory of Pan -Indianism by showing how it evolved 
from other assimilationist theories  
(D) examine several assimilationist theories in order to demonstrate that they rest 
on a common assumption  
(E) criticize the theory of Pan -Indianism by pointing out that it rests upon an 
assumption for which there is no supporting evidence  
18. Which one of the following most accurately describe s the authors attitude 
towards the theory of Pan -Indianism?  
(A) critical of its tendency to attribute political motives to cultural practices  
(B) discomfort at its negative charact erization of cultural borrowing by native 
Americans  
(C) hopeful about its chance for preserving tribal culture  
(D) offended by its claim that assimilation is a desirable consequence of cultural 
contact  
(E) skeptical that it is a complete explanation of recent changes in native 
American society  
19. With which one of the following statements would the author of the passage be  LSAT  965 
 most likely to agree? (Intertribal activities, on the other hand, reinforce native 
American identity along a broader front, where thi s identity is directly threatened 
by outside influences. ) 
(A) The resurgence of the powwow is a sign that native American customs are 
beginning to have an important influence on Euroamerican society.  
(B) Although native Americans draw conscious distinction s between tribal and 
intertribal activities, there is no difference in how the two types of activity 
actually function within the context of native American society.  
(C) Without intertribal activities, it would be more difficult for native Americans 
to mai ntain the cultural differences between native American and 
Euroamerican society.  
(D) The powwow was recently revived, after an extended hiatus, in order to 
strengthen native Americans sense of ethnic identity.  
(E) The degree of urbanization, intertriba l communication, and politicization 
among native Americans has been exaggerated by proponents of the theory 
of Pan -Indianism.  
20. Which one of the following situations most clearly illustrates the phenomenon of 
intertribalism, as that phenomenon is describ ed in the passage?  
(A) a native American tribe in which a number of powerful societies attempt to 
prevent the revival of a traditional dance  
(B) a native American tribe whose members attempt to learn the native languages 
of several other tribes  
(C) a nativ e American tribe whose members attempt to form a political 
organization in order to redress several grievances important to that tribe  
(D) a native American tribe in which a significant percentage of the members 
have forsake their tribal identity and becom e assimilated into Euroamerican 
society  
(E) a native American tribe whose members often travel to other parts of the 
reservation in order to visit friends and relatives  
21. In the passage, the author is primarily concerned with doing which one of the 
following? 
(A) identifying an assumption common to various assimilationist theories and 
then criticizing these theories by showing this assumption to be false  
(B) arguing that the recent revival of a number of tribal practices shows 
sociologists are mis taken in believing intertribilism to be a potent force 
among native American societies  
(C) questioning the belief that native American societies will eventually be 
assimilated into Euroamerican society by arguing that intertribalism helps 
strengthen native  American identity  
(D) showing how the recent resurgence of tribal activities is a deliberate attempt 
to counteract the growing influence of intertribalism  966 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (E) proposing an explanation of why the ascension of intertribalism could result 
in the eventual dissolution of tribes and complete assimilation of native 
American into Euroamerican society  
Scientists typically advocate the analytic method of studying complex systems: systems 
are divided into component parts that are investigated separately. But ninet eenth -century 
critics of this method claimed that when a system s parts are isolated its complexity tends to be 
lost. To address  the perceived weakness of the analyt ic method these critics put forward a 
concept called organicism, which posited that the whole determines the nature of its parts and 
that the parts of a whole are interdependent.  
Organicism depended upon the theory of internal relations, which states that relations 
between entities are possible only within some whole that embraces them, and that entities are 
altered by the relationships into which they enter. If an entity stands in a relationship with 
another entity, it has some property as a consequence. W ithout this relationship, and hence 
without the property, the entity would be different and so would be another entity. Thus, the 
property is one of the entitys defining characteristics. Each of an entitys relationships likewise 
determines a defining cha racteristic of the entity.  
One problem with the theory of internal relations is that not all properties of an entity are 
defining characteristics: numerous properties are accompanying characteristics even if they 
are always present , their presence does not  influence the entitys identity. Thus, even if it is 
admitted that every relationship into which an entity enters determines some characteristic of 
the entity, it is not necessarily true that such characteristics will define the entity; it is possible 
for the entity to enter into a relationship yet remain essentially unchanged.  
The ultimate difficulty with the theory of internal relations is that it renders  the acquisition 
of knowledge impossible . To truly know an entity, we must know all of its relationsh ips; but 
because the entity is related to everything in each whole of which  it is a part, these wholes must 
be known completely before the entity can be known. This seems to be a prerequisite 
impossible to satisfy.  
Organicists criticism of the analytic me thod arose from their failure to fully comprehend 
the method . In rejecting the analytic method, organicists overlooked the fact that before the 
proponents of the method analyzed the component parts of a system, they first determined 
both the laws applicabl e to the whole system and the initial conditions of the system ; 
proponents of the method thus did not study parts of a system in full isolation from the system 
as a whole . Since organicists failed to recognize this, they never advance d any argument to 
show that laws and initial conditions of complex systems cannot be discovered. Hence, 
organicists offered no valid reason for rejecting the analytic method or for adopting organicism 
as a replacement for it.  
22. Which one of the following  most completely and accurately summarizes the 
argument of the passage?  
(A) By calling into question the possibility that complex systems can be studied 
in their entirety, organicists offered an alternative to the analytic method 
favored by nineteenth -century scientists.  
(B) Organicists did not offer a useful method of studying complex systems  LSAT  967 
 because they did not acknowledge that there are relationship into which an 
entity may enter that do not alter the entity s identity.  
(C) Organicism is flawed because it relies on a theory that both ignores the fact 
that not all characteristics of entities are defining and ultimately makes the 
acquisition of knowl edge impossible.  
(D) Organicism does not offer a valid challenge to the analytic method both 
because it reli es on faulty theory and because it is based on a 
misrepresentation of the analytic method.  
(E) In criticizing the analytic method , organicists neglected to disprove that 
scientists who employ the method are able to discover the laws and initial 
conditio ns of the systems they study.  
23. According to the passage, organicists chief objection to the analytic method was 
that the method  
(A) oversimplified systems by isolating their components  
(B) assumed that a system can be divided into component parts  
(C) ignored the laws applicable to the system as a whole  
(D) claimed that the parts of a system are more important than the system as a 
whole  
(E) denied the claim that entities enter into relationships  
24. The passage offers information to help answer e ach of the following questions 
EXCEPT:  
(A) Why does the theory of internal relations appear to make the acquisition of 
knowledge impossible?  
(B) Why did the organicists propose replacing the analytic method?  
(C) What is the difference between a defining ch aracteristic and an accompanying 
characteristic?  
(D) What did organicists claim are the effects of an entity entering into a 
relationship with another entity?  
(E) What are some of the advantages of separating out the parts of a system for 
study?  
25. The passage most strongly supports the ascription  of which one of the following 
views to scientists who use the analytic method?  
(A) A complex system is best understood by studying its component parts in full 
isolation from the system as a whole.  
(B) The part s of a system should be studied with an awareness of the laws and 
initial conditions that govern the system.  
(C) It is not possible to determine the laws governing a system until the systems 
parts are separated from one another.  
(D) Because the parts of a  system are interdependent, they cannot be studied 968 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 separately without destroying the systems complexity.  
(E) Studying the parts of a system individually eliminate the need to determine 
which characteristics of the parts are defining characteristics.  
26. Which one of the following is a principle upon which the author bases an 
argument against the theory of the internal relations?  
(A) An adequate theory of complex systems must define the entities of which the 
system is composed.  
(B) An acceptable theory c annot have consequences that contradict its basic 
purpose.  
(C) An adequate method of study of complex systems should reveal the actual 
complexity of the system it studies.  
(D) An acceptable theory must describe the laws and initial conditions of a 
complex system.  
(E) An acceptable method of studying complex systems should not study parts of 
the system in isolation from the system as a whole.  
LSAT   28    SECTION IV  
Time  35 minutes  27 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a gro up of questions to be answered on 
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that m ost accurately and completely answers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
Opponents of compulsory national service  claim that such a program is not in keeping with  
the liberal principles upon which Western democracies are founded. This reasoning is 
reminiscent of the argument that a tax on ones income is undemocratic because it violates 
ones right to property. Such conceptions of the liberal state fail to take into ac count the 
intricate character of the social agreement that undergirds our liberties. It is only in the context 
of a community that the notion of individual rights has any application; individual rights are 
meant to define the limits of peoples actions wit h respect to other people. Implicit in such a 
context is the concept of shared sacrifice. Were no taxes paid, there could be no law 
enforcement, and the enforcement of law is of benefit to everyone in society. Thus, each of us 
must bear a share of the burd en to ensure that the community is protected.  
The responsibility to defend ones nation against outside aggression is surely no less than 
the responsibility to help pay for law enforcement within the nation. Therefore, the state is 
certainly within its rig hts to compel citizens to perform national service when it is needed for the 
benefit of society.  
It might be objected that the cases of taxation and national service are not analogous: 
While taxation must be coerced, the military is quite able to find recr uits without resorting to 
conscription . Furthermore, proponents of national service do not limit its scope to only those 
duties absolutely necessary to the defense of the nation. The refore, it may be contended, 
compulsory national service oversteps the acceptable boundaries of governmental interference  LSAT  969 
 in the lives of its citizens.  
By responding thus,  the opponent of national service  has already allowed  that it is a right 
of government to demand service when it is needed. But what is the true scope of the te rm 
need ? If it is granted, say, that present tax policies are legitimate intrusions on the right t o 
property, then it must also be granted that need involves more tha n just what is necessary for 
a sound national defense. Even the most conservative of politicians admits that tax money is 
rightly spent on programs that, while not necessary for the surviv al of the state, are 
nevertheless of great benefit to society. Can the opponent of national service truly claim that 
activities of the military such as quelling civil disorders, rebuilding dams and bridges, or 
assisting the victims of natural disasters all extraneous to the defense of society against 
outside aggression do not provide a similar benefit to the nation? Upon reflection, opponents 
of national service must concede that such a broadened conception of what is necessary is  in 
keeping with the ideas of shared sacrifice  and community benefit that are essential to the 
functioning of a liberal democratic state.  
1. Which one of the following most accurately describes the authors attitude toward 
the relationship between citizenship and individual rights i n a democracy?  
(A) confidence that individual rights are citizens most important guarantees of 
personal freedom  
(B) satisfaction at how individual rights have protected citizens from unwarranted 
government intrusion  
(C) alarm that so many citizens use ind ividual rights as an excuse to take 
advantage of one another  
(D) concern that individual rights represent citizens only defense against 
government interference  
(E) dissatisfaction at how some citizens cite individual rights as a way of 
avoiding certain  obligations to their government  
2. The author indicates all politicians agree about the  
(A) legitimacy of funding certain programs that serve the national good  
(B) use of the military to prevent domestic disorders  
(C) similarity of conscription and compul sory taxation  
(D) importance of broadening the definition of necessity  
(E) compatibility of compulsion with democratic principles  
3. Which one of the following most accurately characterizes what the author means 
by the term social agreement (line 8)?  
(A) an agreement among members of a community that the scope of their 
individual liberties is limited somewhat by their obligations to one another  
(B) an agreement among members of a community that they will not act in ways 
that infringe upon each others pursuit of individual liberty  
(C) an agreement among members of a community that they will petition the 
government for redress when government actions limit their rights  970 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (D) an agreement between citizens and their government detailing which 
government acti ons do or do not infringe upon citizens personal freedoms  
(E) an agreement between citizens and their government stating that the 
government has right to suspend individual liberties whenever it sees fit  
4. According to the author, national service and  taxation are analogous in the sense 
that both  
(A) do not require that citizens be compelled to help bring them about  
(B) are at odds with the notion of individual rights in a democracy  
(C) require different degrees of sacrifice from different citizens  
(D) allow the government to overstep its boundaries and interfere in the lives of 
citizens  
(E) serve ends beyond those related to the basic survival of the state  
5. Based on the information in the passage, which one of the following would most 
likely be fo und objectionable by those who oppose compulsory national service?  
(A) the use of tax revenues to prevent the theft of national secrets by foreign 
agents  
(B) the use of tax revenues to fund relief efforts for victims of natural disasters in 
other nations  
(C) the use of tax revenues to support the upkeep of the nations standing army  
(D) the use of tax revenues to fund programs for the maintenance of domestic 
dams and bridges  
(E) the use of tax revenues to aid citizens who are victims of natural disasters  
James Porter (1905 -1970) was the first scholar to identify the African influence on visual 
art in the Americans, and much of what is known about the cultural legacy that 
African -American artists inherited from their African forebears has come to us by way  of his 
work. Porter, a painter and art historian, began by studying African -American crafts of the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. This research revealed that many of the household items 
created by African -American men and women walking sticks, jugs,  and textiles displayed 
characteristics that linked them iconographically to artifacts of West Africa. Porter then went on 
to establish clearly the range of the cultural territory inherited by later African -American artists.  
An example of this aspect of Po rters research occurs  in his essay Robert S. Duncanson, 
Midwestern Romantic -Realist. The work of Duncanson, a nineteenth -century painter of the 
Hudson River school, like that of his predecessor in the movement, Joshua J ohnston, was 
commonly thought to have been created by a Euro -American artist. Porter proved definitively 
that both Duncanson and Johnston were of African ancestry. Porter published this finding and 
thousands of others in a comprehensive volume tracing the history of African -American art. At 
the time of its first printing in 1943, only two other books devoted exclusively to the 
accomplishments of African -American artists existed. Both of these books were written by Alain 
LeRoy Locke, a professor at the unive rsity where Porter also taught. While these earlier studies 
by Locke are interesting for being the first to  survey the field, neither addressed the critical 
issue of African precursors; Porter s book addressed this issue, painstakingly integrating the  LSAT  971 
 history of African -American art into the larger history of art in the Americas without separating 
it from those qualities that gave it its unique ties to African artisanship. Porter may have been 
especially attuned to these ties because of his conscious effort  to maintain them in his own 
paintings, many of which combine the style of the genre portrait with evidence of an extensive 
knowledge of the cultural history of various African peoples.  
In his later years , Porter wrote additional chapters for later edition s of his book, constantly 
revising and correcting his findings, some of which had been based of necessity  on fragmentary 
evidence. Among his later achievements were his definitive reckoning  of the birth year of the 
painter Patrick Reason, long a point of scholarly uncertainty, and his identification of an 
unmarked grave in San Francisco as that of the scul ptor Edmonia Lewis. At his death, Porter left 
extensive notes for unfinished project aimed at exploring the influence of African art on the art 
of the Western world generally, a body of research whose riches  scholars still have not 
exhausted.  
6. Which one of the following most accurately states the main idea of the passage?  
(A) Because the connections between African -American art and other art in the 
Americas had been established by earlier scholars, Porters work  focused on 
showing African -American arts connections to African artisanship.  
(B) In addition to showing the connections between African -American art and 
African artisanship, Porters most important achievement was illustrating the 
links between African -American art and other art in Americas.  
(C) Despite the fact that his last book remains unfinished, Porters work was the 
first to devote its attention exclusively to the accomplishments of 
African -American artists.  
(D) Although showing the connections betw een African -American art and African 
artisanship, Porters work concentrated primarily on placing 
African -American art in the context of Western art in general.  
(E) While not the first body of scholarship to treat the subject of 
African -American art, Po rters work was the first to show the connections 
between African -American art and African artisanship.  
7. The discussion of Lockes books is intended primarily to  
(A) argue that Portes book depended upon Lockes pioneering scholarship  
(B) highlight an im portant way in which Porters work differed from previous 
work in his field  
(C) suggest an explanation for why Porters book was little known outside 
academic circles  
(D) support the claim that Porter was not the first to notice African influences in 
Afric an-American art  
(E) argue that Lockes example was a major influence o Porters decision to 
publish his findings  
8. The passage states which one of the following about the 1943 edition of Porters 
book on African -American art?  972 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (A) It received little sch olarly attention at first.  
(B) It was revised and improved upon in later editions.  
(C) It took issue with several of Lockes conclusions.  
(D) It is considered the definitive version of Porters work.  
(E) It explored the influence of African art on weste rn art in general.  
9. Given the information in the passage, Porters identification of the ancestry of 
Duncanson and Johnston provides conclusive evidence for which one of the 
following statements?  
(A) Some of the characteristics defining the Hudson River school are 
iconographically linked to Weston African artisanship.  
(B) Some of the works of Duncanson and Johnston are not in the style of the 
Hudson River school.  
(C) Some of the work of Euro -American painters displays similarities to 
African -American craf ts of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.  
(D) Some of the works of the Hudson River school were done by 
African -American painters.  
(E) Some of the works of Duncanson and Johnston were influenced by West 
African artifacts.  
10. Which one of the follo wing can most reasonably be inferred from the passage 
about the study that Porter left unfinished at his death?  
(A) If completed, it would have contradicted some of the conclusions contained 
in his earlier book.  
(B) If completed, it would have amended some  of the conclusions contained in 
his earlier book.  
(C) If completed, it would have brought up to date the comprehensive history of 
African -American art begun in his earlier book.  
(D) If completed, it would have expanded upon the project of his earlier book  by 
broadening the scope of inquiry found in the earlier book.  
(E) If completed, it would have supported some of the theories put forth by 
Porters contemporaries since the publication of his earlier book.  
11. Which of the following hypothetical observa tions is most closely analogous to 
the discoveries Porter made about African -American crafts of the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries?  
(A) Contemporary Haitian  social customs have a unique character dependent on 
but different from both their African and French origins.  
(B) Popular music in the United States, some of which is based on African 
musical traditions, often influences music being composed on the African 
continent.  
(C) Many novels written in Canada by Chinese immigrants exhibit narrative  LSAT  973 
 themes v ery similar to those found in Chinese folktales.  
(D) Extensive Indian immigration to England has made traditional Indian foods 
nearly as popular there as the traditional English foods that had been popular 
there before Indian immigration.  
(E) Some Mexic an muralists of the early twentieth century consciously imitated 
the art of native peoples as a response to the Spanish influences that had 
predominated in Mexican art.  
12. The passage most strongly supports which one of the following inferences about 
Porters own paintings?  
(A) They often contained figures or images derived from the work of African 
artisans.  
(B) They fueled his interest in pursuing a career in art history.  
(C) They were used in Porters book to show the extent of African influence on 
Afric an-American art.  
(D) They were a deliberate attempt to prove his theories about art history.  
(E) They were done after all of his academic work had been completed.  
13. Based on the passage, which one of the following, if true, would have been most 
releva nt to the project Porter was working on at the time of his death?  
(A) African -American crafts of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries have 
certain resemblances to European folk crafts of earlier periods.  
(B) The paintings of some twentieth -century Europ ean artists prefigured certain 
stylistic developments in North African graphic art.  
(C) The designs of many of the quilts made by African -American women in the 
nineteenth century reflect designs of European trade goods.  
(D) After the movement of large numb ers of African -Americans to cities, the 
African influences in the work of many African -American painters 
increased.  
(E) Several portraits by certain twentieth -century European painters were 
modeled after examples of Central African ceremonial masks.  
Between June 1987 and May 1988, the bodies of at least 740 bottlenose  dolphins out of a 
total coastal population of 3,000 to 5,000 washed  ashore on the Atlantic coast of the United 
States. Since some of the dead animals never washed ashore, the overall disaster was 
presumably worse; perhaps 50 percent of the population died. A dolphin die-off of this 
character and magnitude had never before been observed; furthermore, the dolphins exhibited 
a startling range of symptoms. The research team that examined the die -off note d the 
presence of both skin lesions and internal lesions in the liver, lung, pancreas and heart, which 
suggested a massive opportunistic  bacterial infection of already weakened animals.  
Tissues from the stricken  dolphins were analyzed for a variety of toxins. Brevetoxin, a toxin 
produced by the blooming of the alga Ptychodiscus brevis , was present in eight out of 
seventeen dolphins tested. Tests for synthetic pollutants revealed that polychlorinated 974 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 biphenyls (PCBs) were present in almost all animals tested.  
The research team concluded that b revetoxin poisoning was the most likely cause of the 
illnesses that killed the dolphins. Although P. brevis  is ordinarily not found along the Atlantic 
coast, an unusual bloom of this organism such blooms are called red tides because of the 
reddish color imparted by the blooming algae did occur in the middle of the affected coastline 
in October 1987.  These researchers believe the toxin accumulated in the tissue of fish and then 
was ingested by dolphins that preyed on them. The emaciated appearance of many dolphins 
indicated that they were metabolizing their blubber  reserves, thereby reducing their buoyancy 
and insulation (and adding to overall stress) as well as releasing stores of previously  
accumulated synthetic pollutants, such as PCBs, which further exacerbated their condition. The 
combined impact made the dolphins vulnerable to opportunistic bacterial infection, the ultimate 
cause of death.  
For several reasons, however, this explanation i s not entirely plausible. First, bottlenose 
dolphins and P. brevis  red tides are both common in the Gulf of Mexico, yet no dolphin die -off of 
a similar magnitude has been noted there. Second, dolphins began dying in June, hundreds of 
miles north of and som e months earlier than the October red tide bloom. Finally, the specific 
effects of brevetoxin on dolphins are unknown, whereas PCB poisoning is know n to impair 
functioning of the immune system and liver and to cause skin lesions; all of these problems are 
observed in the diseased animals. An alternative hypothesis, which accounts for these facts, is 
that a sudden influx of pollutants, perhaps from offshore dumping, triggered a cascade  of 
disorders in animals whose systems were already heavily laden with pollutants. Although 
brevetoxin may have been a contributing factor, the event that actually precipitated the die -off 
was a sharp increase in the dolphins  exposure to synthetic pollutants.  
14. The passage is primarily concerned with assessing  
(A) the effects of a devastating bacterial infection in Atlantic coast bottlenose 
dolphins  
(B) the progress by which illnesses in Atlantic coast bottlenose dolphins were 
correctly  diagnosed  
(C) the weaknesses in the research methodology used to explore the dolphin 
die-off 
(D) possible alternative explanations for the massive dolphin die -off 
(E) relative effects of various marine pollutants on dolphin mortality  
15. Which one of t he following is mentioned in the passage as evidence for the 
explanation of the dolphin die -off offered in the final paragraph?  
(A) the release of stored brevetoxins from the dolphins blubber reserves  
(B) the date on which offshore dumping was known to ha ve occurred nearby  
(C) the presence of dumping sites for PCBs in the area  
(D) the synthetic pollutants that were present in the fish eaten by the dolphins  
(E) the effects of PCBs on liver function in dolphins  
16. Which one of the following is most analo gous to the approach taken by author of  LSAT  975 
 the passage with regard to the research described in the third paragraph?  
(A) A physics teacher accepts the data from a student s experiment but questions 
the student s conclusions.  
(B) An astronomer provides additio nal observations to support another 
astronomer s theory.  
(C) A cook revises a traditional recipe by substituting modern ingredients for 
those used in the original.  
(D) A doctor prescribes medication for a patient whose illness was misdiagnosed 
by another d octor.  
(E) A microbiologist sets out to replicate the experiment that yielded a classic 
theory of cell structure.  
17. Which one of the following most accurately describes the organization of the last 
paragraph?  
(A) One explanation is criticized and diff erent explanation is proposed.  
(B) An argument is advanced and then refuted by means of an opposing 
argument.  
(C) Objections against a hypothesis are advanced, the hypothesis is explained 
more fully, and then the objections are rejected.  
(D) New evidence i n favor of a theory is described, and then the theory is 
reaffirmed.  
(E) Discrepancies between two explanations are noted, and a third explanation is 
proposed.  
18. It can be inferred f rom the passage that the author would most probably agree 
with which one of the following statements about brevetoxin?  
(A) It may have been responsible for the dolphins skin lesions but could not have 
contributed to the bacterial infection.  
(B) It forms more easily when both P. brevis  and synthetic pollutants are present 
in the environment simultaneously . 
(C) It damages liver function and immune system responses in bottlenose 
dolphins but may not have triggered this particular dolphin die -off. 
(D) It is unlikely to be among the factors that contributed to the dolphin die -off. 
(E) It is unlikely to have caused the die -off because it was not present in the 
dolphins  environment when the die -off began.  
19. The explanation for the dolphin die -off given by the research team most strongly 
supports which one of the following?  
(A) The biological mechanism by which brevetoxin affects dolphins is probably 
different from that by which it affects other marine animals.  
(B) When P. brevis  blooms in an area where it does not usually exist, it is more 
toxic than it is in its usual habitat . 976 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (C) Opportunistic bacterial infection is usually associated with brevetoxin 
poisoning in bottlenose dolphins.  
(D) The dolphins emaciated state was probably a symptom of PCB poisoning 
rather than of brevetoxin poisoning.  
(E) When a dolphin metabolizes  its blubber, the PCBs released may be more 
dangerous to the dolphin than they were when stored in the blubber.  
20. The author refers to dolphins in the Gulf of Mexico in the last paragraph in order 
to 
(A) refute the assertion that dolphins tend not to inh abit areas where P. brevis  is 
common  
(B) compare the effects of synthetic pollutants on these dolphins and on Atlantic 
coast dolphins  
(C) cast doubt on the belief that P. brevis  contributes substantially to dolphin 
die-offs 
(D) illustrate the fact that dol phins in relatively  pollution -free waters are healthier 
than dolphins in polluted  waters  
(E) provide evidence for the argument that P. brevis  was probably responsible for 
the dolphins  deaths  
21. Which one of the following factors is explicitly cited as  contributing to the 
dolphins deaths in both theories discussed in the passage?  
(A) the dolphins diet  
(B) the presence of P. brevis  in the Gulf of Mexico  
(C) the wide variety of toxins released by the red tide bloom of October 1987  
(D) the presence of sy nthetic pollutants in the dolphins bodies  
(E) the bacterial infection caused by a generalized failure of the dolphins 
immune systems  
In England before 1660, a husband controlled his wifes property. In the late seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries, wi th the shift from land -based to commercial wealth, marriage began 
to incorporate certain features of a contract . Historian have traditionally argued that this trend 
represented a gain for women, one that reflects changing views about democracy and property  
following the English Restoration  in 1660. Susan Staves contests  this view; she argues that 
whatever gains marriage co ntracts may briefly have represented for women were undermined 
by judicial decisions about womens contractual rights.  
Sifting  (to go through especially to sort out what is useful or valuable sifted the evidence 
often used with through sift through a pi le of old letters ) through  the tangled details of court 
cases, Staves demonstrates that, despite surface changes, a rhetoric of equality, and 
occasional decisions supporting womens financial power, definitions of mens and womens 
property remained incon sistent generally to womens detriment. For example, dower  lands 
(property inherited by wives after their husbands deaths) could not be sold, but  curtsey  
property (inherited by husbands from their wives) could be sold. Furthermore, comparatively  LSAT  977 
 new concepts that developed in conjunction with the marriage c ontract, such as jointure , pin 
money  (pin money : money given by a man to his wife for her own use ), and separate 
maintenance , were compromised by peculiar rules. For instance,  if a woman spent her pin 
money (money paid by the husband according to the marriage contract for wifes personal 
items) on possessions other than clothes she could not sell them; in effect  they belonged to her 
husband. In addition, a wife could sue for pin money only up to a year in arrears which 
rendered a suit impractical. Similarly, separate ma intenance allowances (stated sums of money 
for the wifes support if husband and wife agreed to live apart) were complicated by the fact 
that if a couple tried to agree in a marriage contract on an amount, they were admitting that a 
supposedly indissoluble  bond could be dissolved, an assumption courts could not recognize. 
Eighteenth -century historians underplayed these inconsistencies, calling them little 
contrarieties that would soon vanish. Staves shows, however, that as judges gained power 
over decisio ns on marriage contracts, they tended to fall back on  pre-1660 assumptions about 
property.  
Staves work on women s property has general implications for other studie s about women 
in eighteenth -century England. Staves revised her previous claim that separate maintenance 
allowances proved the weakening of patriarchy; she now finds that an oversimplification. She 
also challenges the contention by historians Jeanne and La wrence Stone that in the late 
eighteenth century wealthy men married widows less often than before because couples began 
marring for love rather than for financial reasons. Staves does not completely undermine their 
contention, but she does counter their a ssumption that widows had more money than 
never -married women. She points out that jointure property (a widows lifetime use of an 
amount of money specified in the marriage contract ) was often lost on remarriage.  
22. Which one of the following best express es the main idea of the passage?  
(A) As notions of property and democracy changed in late seventeenth -and 
eighteenth -century England, marriage settlements began to incorporate 
contractual features designed to protect womens property rights.  
(B) Traditiona l historians have incorrectly identified the contractual features that 
were incorporated into marriage contracts in late seventeenth -and 
eighteenth -century England.  
(C) The incorporation of contractual features into marriage settlements in late 
seventeen -and eighteenth -century England did not represent a significant 
gain of women.  
(D) An examination of late seventeenth -and eighteenth -century English court 
cases indicates that most marriage settlements did not incorporate 
contractual features designed to pro tect womens property rights . 
(E) Before marriage settlements incorporated contractual features protecting 
womens property rights, women were unable to gain any financial power in 
England.  
23. Which one of the following best describes the function of t he last paragraph in 
the context of the passage as a whole?  
(A) It suggests that Staves recent work has caused significant revision of theories 978 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 about the rights of women in eighteenth -century England.  
(B) It discusses research that may qualify Staves wor k on womens property in 
eighteenth -century England.  
(C) It provides further support for Staves argument by describing more recent 
research on womens property in eighteenth -century England.  
(D) It asserts that Staves recent work has provided support for  two other 
hypotheses developed by historians of eighteenth -century England.  
(E) It suggests the implications Staves recent research has for other theories 
about women in eighteenth -century England.  
24. The primary purpose of the passage to  
(A) compare  two explanations for the same phenomenon  
(B) summarize research that refutes an argument  
(C) resolve a long -standing controversy  
(D) suggest that a recent hypothesis should be reevaluated  
(E) provide support for a traditional theory  
25. According to th e passage, Staves research has which one of the following effects 
on the Stones contention about marriage in late eighteenth -century England?  
(A) Staves research undermines one of the Stones assumptions but does not 
effectively invalidate their content ion. 
(B) Staves research refutes that the Stones contention by providing additional 
data overlooked by the Stones.  
(C) Staves research shows that the Stones contention cannot be correct, and that 
a number of their assumptions are mistaken.  
(D) Staves research indicates that the Stones contention is incorrect because it is 
based on contradictory data.  
(E) Staves research qualifies the Stones contention by indicating that it is based 
on accurate out incomplete data.  
26. According to the passage, St aves indicates that which one of the following was 
true of judicial decisions on contractual rights?  
(A) Judges frequently misunderstood and misapplied laws regarding married 
womens property.  
(B) Judges were aware of inconsistencies in laws concerning wom ens contractual 
rights but claimed that such inconsistencies would soon vanish.  
(C) Judges decisions about marriage contracts tended to reflect assumptions 
about property that had been common before 1660.  
(D) Judges had little influence on the developmen t and application of laws 
concerning married womens property.  
(E) Judges recognized the patriarchal assumptions underlying laws concerning 
married womens property and tried to interpret the laws in ways that would  LSAT  979 
 protect women.  
27. The passage sugges ts that the historians mentioned in line 5 would be most likely 
to agree with which one of the following statements?  
(A) The shift from land -based to commercial wealth changed views about 
property but did not significantly benefit married women until the l ate 
eighteenth century.  
(B) Despite initial judicial resistance to womens contractual rights, marriage 
contracts represented a significant gain for married women.  
(C) Although marriage contracts incorporated a series of surface changes and a 
rhetoric of e quality, they did not ultimately benefit married women.  
(D) Changing views about property and democracy in post -Restoration England 
had an effect on property laws that was beneficial to women.  
(E) Although contractual rights protecting womens property represented a small 
gain for married women, most laws continued to be more beneficial for men 
than for women.  
LSAT  2002  SECTION I II 
Time  35 minutes  26 Questions  
Directions: Each passage in this section is followed by a group of questions to be answered on  
the basis of what is stated or implied in the passage. For some of the questions, more than one 
of the choices could conceivably answer the question. However, you are to choose the best 
answer, that is, the response that most accurately and completely ans wers the question, and 
blacken the corresponding space on your answer sheet.  
The myth persists that in 1492 the Western Hemisphere was an untamed wilderness and 
that it was European settlers who harnessed and transformed its ecosystems. But scholarship 
shows that forests, in particular, had been altered to varying degrees well before the arrival of 
Europeans. Native populations had converted much of the forests to successfully cultivated 
stands, especially by means of burning. Nevertheless, some researchers  have maintained that 
the extent, frequency, and impact of such burning was minimal. One geographer claims that 
climatic change could have accounted for some of the changes in forest composition; another 
argues that burning by native populations was done o nly sporadically, to augment the effects of 
natural fires.  
However, a large body of evidence for the routine practice of burning exists in the 
geographical record. One group of researchers found, for example, that sedimentary charcoal 
accumulations in what  is now the northeastern United States are greatest where known native 
American settlements were greatest. Other evidence shows that, while the characteristics and 
impact of fires set by native populations varied regionally according to population size, ex tent of 
resource management techniques, and environment, all such fires had markedly different 
effects on vegetation patter than did natural fires. Controlled burning crated grassy openings 
such as meadows and glades. Burning also promoted a mosaic quality  to North and south 
American ecosystems, creating forests in many different stages of ecological development. 
Much of the mature forestland was characterized by open herbaceous undergrowth, another 980 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 result of the clearing brought about by burning.  
In North American, controlled burning crated conditions favorable to berries and other 
fire-tolerant and sun -loving foods. Burning also converted mixed stands of trees to 
homogeneous forest, for example the longleaf, slash pine, and scrub oak forests of the 
southea stern U.S. natural fires do account for some of this vegetation, but regular burning 
clearly extended and maintained it. Burning also influenced forest composition in the tropics, 
where natural fires are rare. An example is the pine -dominant forests of Nic aragua, where 
warm temperatures and heavy rainfall naturally favor mixed tropical or rain forests. While there 
are primarily grow in cooler, drier, higher elevations, regions where such vegetation is in large 
part natural and even prehuman. Today, the Nica raguan pines occur where there has been 
clearing followed by regular burning, and the same is likely to have occurred in the past: such 
forests ere present when Europeans arrived and were found only in areas where native 
settlements were substantial; when these settlements were abandoned, the land returned to 
mixed hardwoods. This succession is also evident elsewhere in similar low tropical elevations in 
the Caribbean and Mexico.  
1. Which one of the following most accurately expresses the main idea of the 
passage?  
(A) Despite extensive evidence that native populations had been burning North 
and South American forests extensively before 1492, some scholars persist 
in claiming that such burning was either infrequent or the result of natural 
causes.  
(B) In oppo sition to the widespread belief that in 1492 the Western hemisphere 
was uncultivated, scholars unanimously agree that naive population were 
substantially altering North and South American forests well before the 
arrival of Europeans.  
(C) Although some scho lars minimize the scope and importance of the burning of 
forests engaged in by native populations of North and South American 
before 1492, evidence of the frequency and impact of such burning is 
actually quite extensive.  
(D) Where scholars had once believe d that North and South American forests 
remained uncultivated until the arrival of Europeans, there is now general 
agreement that native populations had been cultivating the forests since well 
before 1492.  
(E) While scholars have acknowledged that North  and South American forests 
were being burned well before 1492, there is still disagreement over whether 
such burning was the result of natural causes or of the deliberate actions of 
native populations.  
2. It can be inferred that a forest burned as describ ed in the passage would have 
been  LEAST likely to display  
(A) numerous types of hardwood trees  
(B) extensive herbaceous undergrowth   LSAT  981 
 (C) a variety of fire -tolerant plants  
(D) various stages of ecological maturity  
(E) grassy opening such as meadows or gla des 
3. Which one of the following is a type of forest identified by the author as a 
product of  controlled burning in recent times?  
(A) scrub oak forests in the southeastern U.S.  
(B) slash pine forests in the southeastern U.S.  
(C) pine forests in Guatemala at high elevations  
(D) pine forests in Mexico at high elevations  
(E) pine forests in Nicaragua at low elevations  
4. Which one of the following is presented by the author as evidence of controlled  
burning in the tropics before the arrival of Europeans?  
(A) extensive homogeneous forests at high elevation  
(B) extensive homogeneous forests at low elevation  
(C) extensive heterogeneous forests at high elevation  
(D) extensive heterogeneous forests at low elevation  
(E) extensive sedimentary charcoal accumulat ions at high elevation  
5. With which one of the following would the author be most likely to agree?  
(A) The long -term effects of controlled burning could just as easily have been 
caused by natural fires.  
(B) Herbaceous undergrowth prevents many forests fro m reaching full maturity.  
(C) European settlers had little impact on the composition of the ecosystems in 
North and South America.  
(D) Certain species of plants may not have been as widespread in North American 
without controlled burning.  
(E) Nicaraguan  pine forests could have been created either by natural fires or by 
controlled burning.  
6. As evidence fro the routine practice of forest burning by native populations 
before the arrival of Europeans, the author cites all of the following EXCEPT:  
(A) The s imilar characteristics of fires in different regions.  
(B) The simultaneous presence of forests at varying stages of maturity  
(C) The existence of herbaceous undergrowth in certain forests  
(D) The heavy accumulation of charcoal near populous settlements  
(E) The presence of meadows and glades in certain forests.  
7. The succession mentioned in line 57 refers to  
(A) forest clearing followed by controlled burning of forests  
(B) tropical rain forest followed by pine forest  982 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (C) European settlement followed by  abandonment of land  
(D) homogeneous pine forest followed by mixed hardwoods  
(E) correct the geographical record  
8. The primary purpose of the passage is to  
(A) refute certain researchers view  
(B) support a common belief  
(C) counter certain evidence  
(D) synthesize two viewpoints  
(E) correct the geographical record  
Intellectual authority is defined as the authority of arguments that prevail by virtue of good 
reasoning and do not depend on coercion or convention. A contrasting notion, institutional 
authority, refers to the power of social institutions to enforce acceptance of arguments that may 
or may not possess intellectual authority. The authority wielded by legal systems is especially 
interesting because such systems are institutions that nonetheles s aspire to a purely intellectual 
authority. One judge goes so far as to claim that courts are merely passive vehicles for applying 
the intellectual authority of the law and possess no coercive powers of their own.  
In contrast, some critics maintain that w hatever authority judicial pronouncements have is 
exclusively institutional. Some of these critics go further, claiming that intellectual authority 
does not really exist i.e., it reduces to institutional authority. But it can be countered that these 
claims  break down when a sufficiently broad historical perspective is taken: Not all arguments 
accepted by institutions withstand the test of time, and some well -reasoned arguments never 
receive institutional imprimatur. The reasonable argument that goes unrecog nized in its own 
time because it challenges institutional beliefs is common in intellectual history; intellectual 
authority and institutional consensus are not the same thing.  
But the critics might respond, intellectual authority is only recognized as such  because of 
institutional consensus. For example, if a musicologist were to claim that an alleged musical 
genius who, after several decades, had not gained respect and recognition for his or her 
compositions is probably not a genius, the critics might say that basing a judgment on a unit of 
timeseveral decades is an institutional rather than an intellectual construct. What, the 
critics might ask, makes a particular number of decades reasonable evidence by which to judge 
genius? The answer, of course, is nothing, except for the fact that such institutional procedures 
have proved useful to musicologists in making such distinctions in the past.  
The analogous legal concept is the doctrine of precedent, i.e., a judges merely deciding a 
case a certain way beco ming a basis for deciding later cases the same way a pure example of 
institutional authority. But eh critics miss the crucial distinction that when a judicial decision is 
badly reasoned, or simply no longer applies in the face of evolving social standards or practices, 
the notion of intellectual authority is introduced: judges reconsider, revise, or in some cases 
throw out in the reconsideration of decisions, leading one to draw the conclusion that legal 
systems contain a significant degree of intellectual authority even if the thrust of their power is 
predominantly institutional.  
9. Which one of the following most accurately states the main idea of the passage?   LSAT  983 
 (A) Although some argue that the authority of legal systems is purely intellectual, 
these systems  possess a degree of institutional authority due to their ability 
to enforce acceptance of badly reasoned or socially inappropriate judicial 
decisions.  
(B) Although some argue that the authority of legal systems is purely institutional, 
theses systems are more correctly seen as vehicles for applying the 
intellectual authority of the law while possessing no coercive power of their 
own.  
(C) Although some argue that the authority of legal systems is purely intellectual, 
these systems in fact wield institutiona l authority by virtue of the fact that 
intellectual authority reduces to institutional authority.  
(D) Although some argue that the authority of legal systems is purely institutional, 
these systems possesses a degree of intellectual authority due to their a bility 
to reconsider badly reasoned or socially inappropriate judicial decisions.  
(E) Although some argue that the authority of legal systems is purely intellectual, 
these systems in fact wield exclusively institutional authority in that they 
possess th e power to enforce acceptance of badly reasoned or socially 
inappropriate judicial decisions.  
10. That some arguments never receive institutional imprimatur (line 22 -23) most  
likely means that these arguments  
(A) fail to gain institutional consensus  
(B) fail to challenge institutional beliefs  
(C) fail to conform to the example of precedent  
(D) fail to convince by virtue of good reasoning  
(E) fail to gain acceptance except by coercion  
11. Which one of the following, if true, most challenges the authors  contention that  
legal systems contain a significant degree of intellectual authority?  
(A) Judges often act under time constraints and occasionally render a badly 
reasoned or socially inappropriate decision.  
(B) In some legal systems, the percentage of jud icial decisions that contain faulty 
reasoning is far higher than it is in other legal systems.  
(C) Many socially inappropriate legal decisions are thrown out by judges only 
after citizens begin to voice opposition to them.  
(D) In some legal systems, the pe rcentage of judicial decisions that are 
reconsidered and revised is far higher than it is in other legal systems.  
(E) Judges are rarely willing to rectify the examples of faulty reasoning they 
discover when reviewing previous legal decisions.  
12. Given the information in the passage, the author is LEAST likely to believe 
which  one of the following?  
(A) Institutional authority may depend on coercion; intellectual authority never 984 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 does.  
(B) Intellectual authority may accept well -reasoned arguments; institut ional 
authority never does.  
(C) Institutional authority may depend on convention; intellectual authority never 
does.  
(D) Intellectual authority sometimes challenges institutional beliefs; institutional 
authority never does.  
(E) Intellectual authority so metimes conflicts with precedent; institutional 
authority never does.  
13. The author discusses the example from musicology primarily in order to  
(A) distinguish the nothing of institutional authority from that of intellectual 
authority  
(B) given an example  of an argument possessing intellectual authority that did not 
prevail in its own time  
(C) identify an example in which the ascription of musical genius did not 
withstand the test of time  
(D) illustrate the claim that assessing intellectual authority requi res an appeal to 
institutional authority  
(E) demonstrate that the authority wielded by the arbiters of musical genius is 
entirely institutional  
14. Based on the passage, the author would be most likely to hold which one of the  
following views about the doctrine of precedent?  
(A) it is the only tool judges should use if they wish to achieve a purely 
intellectual authority.  
(B) It is a useful tool in theory but in practice it invariably conflicts with the 
demands of intellectual authority.  
(C) It is a usef ul tool but lacks intellectual authority unless it is combined with the 
reconsidering of decisions.  
(D) It is often an unreliable tool because it prevents judges from reconsidering the 
intellectual authority of past decisions.  
(E) It is an unreliable to ol that should be abandoned because it lacks intellectual 
authority.  
In explaining the foundations of the discipline known as historical sociology the 
examination of history using the methods of sociology historical sociologist Philip Abrams 
argues that, w hile people are made by society as much as society is made by people, 
sociologists approach to the subject is usually to focus on only one of these forms of influence 
to the exclusion of the other. Abrams insists on the necessity for sociologists to move beyond 
these one -sided approaches to understand society as an entity constructed by individuals who 
are at the same time constructed by their society. Abrams refers to this continuous process as 
structuring.   LSAT  985 
 Abrams also sees history as the result of stru cturing. People, both individually and as 
members of collectives, make history. But our making of history is itself formed and informed 
not only by the historical conditions we inherit from the past, but also by the prior formation of 
our own identities an d capacities, which are shaped by what Abrams calls 
contingencies social phenomena over which we have varying degrees of control. 
Contingencies include such things as the social conditions under which we come of age, the 
condition of our households econ omy, the ideologies available to help us make sense of our 
situation, and accidental circumstances. The ways in which contingencies affect our individual 
or group identities create a structure of forces within which we are able to act, and that partially 
determines the sorts of actions we are able to perform.  
In Abrams analysis, historical structuring, like social structuring, is manifold and 
unremitting. To understand it, historical sociologists must extract from it certain significant 
episodes, or events,  that their methodology can then analyze and interpret. According to 
Abrams, these events are points at which action and contingency meet, points that represent a 
cross section of the specific social and individual forces in play at a given time. At such 
moments, individuals stand forth as agents of history not simply because they possess a unique 
ability to act, but also because in them we see the force of the specific social conditions that 
allowed their actions to come forth. Individuals can make their mark on history, yet in 
individuals one also finds the convergence of wider social forces. In order to capture the various 
facets of this mutual interaction, Abrams recommends a fourfold structure to which he believes 
the investigations of historical soci ologists should conform: first, description of the event itself; 
second, discussion of the social context that helped bring the event about and gave it 
significance; third, summary of the life history of the individual agent in the event; and fourth, 
analysis of the consequences of the event both for history and for the individual.  
15. Which one of the following most accurately states the central idea of the passage?  
(A) Abrams argues that historical sociology rejects the claims of sociologists who 
assert t hat the sociological concept of structuring cannot be applied to the 
interactions between individuals and history.  
(B) Abrams argues that historical sociology assumes that, despite the views of 
sociologists to the contrary, history influences the social co ntingencies that 
affect individuals.  
(C) Abrams argues that historical sociology demonstrates that, despite the views 
of sociologists to the contrary, social structures both influence and are 
influenced by the events of history.  
(D) Abrams describes histor ical sociology as a discipline that unites two 
approaches taken by sociologists to studying the formation of societies and 
applies the resulting combined approach to the study of history.  
(E) Abrams describes historical society as an attempt to compensa te for the 
shortcoming of traditional historical methods by applying the methods 
established in sociology.  
16. Given the passages argument, which one of the following sentences most  
logically completes the last paragraph?  986 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (A) Only if they adhere to this s tructure, Abrams believes, can historical 
sociologists conclude with any certainty that the events that constitute the 
historical record are influenced by the actions of individuals  
(B) Only if they adhere to this structure, Abrams believes, will historica l 
sociologists be able to counter the standard sociological assumption that 
there is very little connection between history and individual agency.  
(C) Unless they can agree to adhere to this structure, Abrams believes, historical 
sociologists risk having t heir discipline treated as little more than an 
interesting but ultimately indefensible adjunct to history and sociology.  
(D) By adhering to this structure, Abrams believes, historical sociologists can 
shed light on issues that traditional sociologists have  chosen to ignore in 
their one -sided approaches to the formation of societies.  
(E) By adhering to this structure, Abrams believes, historical sociologists will be 
able to better portray the complex connections between human agency and 
history.  
17. The p assage states that a contingency could be each of the following EXCEPT:  
(A) a social phenomenon  
(B) a form of historical structuring  
(C) an accidental circumstance  
(D) a condition controllable to some extent by an individual  
(E) a partial determinant of  an individuals actions  
18. Which one of the following is most analogous to the ideal work of a historical  
sociologist as outlined by Abrams?  
(A) In a report on the enactment of a bill into law, a journalist explains why the 
need for the bill arose, sketc hes the biography of the principal legislator who 
wrote the bill, and ponders the effect that the bills enactment will have both 
one society and on the legislators career.  
(B) In a consultation with a patient, a doctor reviews the patients medical histo ry, 
suggests possible reasons for the patients current condition, and 
recommends steps that the patient should take in the future to ensure that the 
condition improves or at least does not get any worse.  
(C) In an analysis of a historical novel, a critic provides information to support 
the claim that details of the works setting are accurate, explains why the 
subject of the novel was of particular interest to the author, and compares the 
novel with some of the authors other books set in the same period.  
(D) In a presentation to stockholders, a corporations chief executive officer 
describes the corporations most profitable activities during the past year, 
introduces the vice president largely responsible for those activities, and 
discusses new projects t he vice president will initiate in the coming year.  
(E) In developing a film based on a historical event, a filmmaker conducts 
interviews with participants in the event, bases part of the films screenplay  LSAT  987 
 on the interviews, and concludes the screenplay  with a sequence of scenes 
speculating on the outcome of the event had certain details been different.  
19. The primary function of the first paragraph of the passage is to  
(A) outline the merits of Abrams conception of historical sociology  
(B) convey the details of Abramss conception of historical sociology  
(C) anticipate challenges to Abramss conception of historical sociology  
(D) examine the roles of key terms used in Abramss conception of historical 
sociology  
(E) identify the basis of Abramss con ception of historical sociology  
20. Based on the passage, which one of the following is the LEAST illustrative  
example of the effect of a contingency upon an individual?  
(A) the effect of the fact that a person experienced political injustice on that 
perso ns decision to work for political reform  
(B) the effect of the fact that a person was raised in an agricultural region on that 
persons decision to pursue a career in agriculture  
(C) the effect of the fact that a person lives in a particular community on that 
persons decision to visit friends in another community  
(D) the effect of the fact that a persons parents practiced a particular religion on 
that persons decision to practice that religion  
(E) the effect of the fact that a person grew up in finan cial hardship on that 
persons decision to help others in financial hardship  
One of the greatest challenges facing medical students today, apart from absorbing 
volumes of technical information and learning habits of scientific thought, is that of remaining  
empathetic to the needs of patients in the face of all this rigorous training. Requiring students 
to immerse themselves completely in medical coursework risks disconnecting them from the 
personal and ethical aspects of doctoring, and such strictly scienti fic thinking is insufficient for 
grappling with modern ethical dilemmas. For these reasons, aspiring physicians need to 
develop new ways of thinking about and interacting with patients. Training in ethics that takes 
narrative literature as its primary subj ect is one method of accomplishing this.  
Although training in ethics is currently provided by medical schools, this training relies 
heavily on an abstract, philosophical view of ethics. Although the conceptual clarity provided by 
a traditional ethics cours e can be valuable, theorizing about ethics contributes little to the 
understanding of everyday human experience or to preparing medical students for the 
multifarious ethical dilemmas they will face as physicians. A true foundation in ethics must be 
predica ted on an understanding of human behavior that reflects a wide array of relationships 
and readily adapts to various perspectives, for this is what is required to develop empathy. 
Ethics courses drawing on narrative literature can better help students prepa re for ethical 
dilemmas precisely because such literature attaches its readers so forcefully to the concrete and 
varied would of human events.  
The act of reading narrative literature is uniquely suited to the development of what might 
be called flexible et hical thinking. To grasp the development of character, to tangle with 988 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 heightening moral crises, and to engage oneself with the story not as one s own but 
nevertheless as something recognizable and worthy of attention, readers must use their moral 
imaginati on. Giving oneself over to the ethical conflicts in a story requires the abandonment of 
strictly absolute, inviolate sets of moral principles. Reading literature also demands that the 
reader adopt another persons point of view that of the narrator or a c haracter in a story and 
thus requires the ability to depart from ones personal ethical stance and examine moral issues 
from new perspectives.  
It does not follow that readers, including medical professionals, must relinquish all moral 
principles, as is the  case with situational ethics, in which decisions about ethical choices are 
made on the basis of intuition ad are entirely relative to the circumstances in which they arise. 
Such an extremely relativistic stance would have as little benefit for the patient  or physician as 
would a dogmatically absolutist one. Fortunately, the incorporation of narrative literature into 
the study of ethics, while serving as a corrective to the later stance, need not lead to the former. 
But it can give us something that is lack ing in the traditional philosophical study of 
ethics namely, a deeper understanding of human nature that can serve as a foundation for 
ethical reasoning and allow greater flexibility in the application of moral principles.  
21. Which one of the following mo st accurately states the main point of the passage?  
(A) Training in ethics that incorporates narrative literature would better cultivate 
flexible ethical thinking and increase medical students capacity for 
empathetic patient care as compared with the trad itional approach of medical 
schools to such training.  
(B) Traditional abstract ethical training, because it is too heavily focused on 
theoretical reasoning, tends to decrease or impair that medical students 
sensitivity to modern ethical dilemmas.  
(C) Only  a properly designed curriculum that balances situational, abstract, and 
narrative approaches to ethics will adequately prepare the medical student 
for complex ethical confrontations involving actual patients.  
(D) Narrative -based instruction in ethics is b ecoming increasingly popular in 
medical schools because it requires students to develop a capacity for 
empathy by examining complex moral issues from a variety of perspectives.  
(E) The study of narrative literature in medical schools would nurture moral  
intuition, enabling the future doctor to make ethical decisions without appeal 
to general principles.  
22. Which one of the following most accurately represents the authors use of the  
term moral imagination in line 38?  
(A) a sense of curiosity, aroused by reading, that leads one to follow actively the 
development of problems involving the characters depicted in narratives.  
(B) A faculty of seeking out and recognizing the ethical controversies involved in 
human relationships and identifying oneself with o ne side or another in such 
controversies  
(C) A capacity to understand the complexities of various ethical dilemmas and to  LSAT  989 
 fashion creative and innovative solutions to them  
(D) An ability to understand personal aspects of ethically significant situations 
even if one is not a direct participant and to empathize with those involved in 
them.  
(E) An ability to act upon ethical principles different from ones own for the sake 
of variety.  
23. It can be inferred from the passage that the author would most likely  agree with  
which one of the following statements?  
(A) The heavy load of technical coursework in todays medical schools often 
keeps them from giving adequate emphasis to courses in medical ethics.  
(B) Students learn more about ethics through the use of fi ction than through the 
use of non -fictional readings.  
(C) The traditional method of ethical training in medical schools should be 
supplemented or replaced by more direct practical experience with real -life 
patients in ethically difficult situations.  
(D) Th e failing of an abstract, philosophical training in ethics can be remedied 
only by replacing it with a purely narrative -based approach.  
(E) Neither scientific training nor traditional philosophical ethics adequately 
prepares doctors to deal with the emo tional dimension of patients needs.  
24.   
25. Which one of the following is most likely the authors overall purpose in the 
passage?  
(A) To advise medical schools on how to implement a narrative -based approach 
to ethics in their curricula.  
(B) To argue that the current methods of ethics education are counterproductive to 
the formation of empathetic doctor -patient relationships . 
(C) To argue that the ethical content of narrative literature foreshadows the 
pitfalls of situational ethics.  
(D) To propose an approach to ethical training in medical school that will 
preserve the human dimension of medicine.  
(E) To demonstrate the value of a well -designed ethics education for medical 
students.  
26. The passage ascribes each of the following characteristics to t he use of narrative 
literature in ethical education EXCEPT:  
(A) It tends to avoid the extreme relativism of situational ethics.  
(B) It connects students to varied types of human events.  
(C) It can help lead medical students to develop new ways of dealing w ith 
patients.  
(D) It requires students to examine moral issues from new perspectives.  990 GMAT, GRE, LSAT RC   
 (E) It can help insulate future doctors from the shock of the ethical dilemmas they 
will confront.  
27. The authors attitude regarding the traditional method of teachi ng ethics in 
medical school can most accurately be described as  
(A) unqualified disapproval of the method and disapproval of all of its effects  
(B) reserved judgment regarding the method and disapproval of all of its effects  
(C) partial disapproval of the method and clinical indifference toward its effects  
(D) partial approval of the method and disapproval of all of its effects  
(E) partial disapproval of the method and approval of some of its effects  
  
GMAT  RC 117Passages  
 GMAT New  63Passages